We used a deeply sequenced dataset of 910 individuals, all of African descent, to construct a set of DNA sequences that is present in these individuals but missing from the reference human genome. We aligned 1.19 trillion reads from the 910 individuals to the reference genome (GRCh38), collected all reads that failed to align, and assembled these reads into contiguous sequences (contigs). We then compared all contigs to one another to identify a set of unique sequences representing regions of the African pan-genome missing from the reference genome. Our analysis revealed 296,485,284 bp in 125,715 distinct contigs present in the populations of African descent, demonstrating that the African pan-genome contains ~10% more DNA than the current human reference genome. Although the functional significance of nearly all of this sequence is unknown, 387 of the novel contigs fall within 315 distinct protein-coding genes, and the rest appear to be intergenic.

Main
Since its initial publication1,2, the human genome sequence has undergone continual improvements aimed at filling gaps and correcting errors. The latest release, GRCh38, spans 3.1 gigabases (Gb), with just 875 remaining gaps3. The ongoing effort to improve the human reference genome, led by the Genome Reference Consortium, has in recent years added alternate loci for genomic regions where variation cannot be captured by SNPs or small insertions and deletions (indels). These alternate loci, which comprise 261 scaffolds in GRCh38, capture a small amount of population variation and improve read mapping for some data sets.

Despite these efforts, the current human reference genome derives primarily from a single individual4, thus limiting its usefulness for genetic studies, especially among admixed populations, such as those representing the African diaspora. In recent years, a growing number of researchers have emphasized the importance of capturing and representing sequencing data from diverse populations and incorporating these data into the reference genome and genomics studies in general5,6,7. The alternate loci in GRCh38 offer one possible way to add such diversity, although it is unclear whether such a solution is sustainable as more populations are sequenced. Among other problems, the addition of alternate loci as separate contigs can mislead sequence alignment programs, which were designed under the assumptions that each read has a single true point of origin and that the genome is represented as a linear haploid sequence8.

The lack of diversity in the reference genome poses many challenges when analyzing individuals whose genetic background does not match the reference. This problem may be addressed by using large databases of known SNPs (for example, dbSNP9), but this solution only addresses single-base differences and small indels and is not adequate for larger variants. Findings from the 1000 Genomes Project indicate that differences between populations are quite large; examination of 26 populations across five continents revealed that 86% of discovered variants were present in only one continental group. In that study, the five African populations examined had the highest number of variant sites compared with the remaining 21 populations10.

One way to address the limitations of a single reference genome is to sequence and assemble reference genomes for other human subpopulations. The 1000 Genomes Project, Genome in a Bottle, and other projects have assembled draft genomes from various populations, including Chinese, Korean, and Ashkenazi individuals11,12,13,14,15. Other groups have used highly homogenous populations (for example, Danish, Dutch, or Icelandic individuals) together with assembly-based approaches to discover SNPs and structural variants (SVs), including up to several megabases of non-reference sequence common to these populations16,17,18,19. Although these variant analyses are a step in the right direction, to date, none have produced a reference-quality genome that can replace GRCh38 (ref. 3); however, this is an explicit goal of the Danish Genome Project (URLs).

While efforts to produce new reference genomes are worthwhile, attempts to create a pan-genome of a human population, a collection of sequences representing all of the DNA in that population, are rare. Although multiple pan-genomes have been created for bacterial species20,21,22, as of yet, there are no pan-genomes for any other animal or plant species. The lack of pan-genomes is due in part to the technical challenges of assembling many deeply sequenced genomes de novo and combining them into one genome. Whereas the Danish Genome Project focused on 50 trios of non-admixed individuals (removing admixed samples from their study17), our study focuses on a highly heterogeneous group of admixed individuals. Because the human reference genome is largely complete (the sequence has very few gaps), our strategy for creating a pan-genome focused on finding large insertions. This approach, although computationally demanding, made the African pan-genome assembly process described here feasible.

A 2010 study that sequenced one Asian and one African individual used the novel sequences identified to estimate that a full human pan-genome would contain an additional 19–40 megabases (Mb) that are not in the current reference genome11. Recent efforts to sequence a Dutch population and a set of 10,000 individuals have supported this estimate, reporting 4.3 and 3.3 Mb of non-reference sequences, respectively18,23; however, neither study was designed with the primary goal of discovering long, non-reference sequences. A 2017 study in which two haploid human genomes (hydatidiform moles) were sequenced using long reads estimated that a single diploid genome may differ by as much as 16 Mb from the reference genome24. As we describe here, our analysis of 910 deeply sequenced individuals, all from the Consortium on Asthma among African-Ancestry Populations in the Americas (CAAPA)25, produced a much larger amount of novel sequence (sequence absent from GRCh38) in the African pan-genome, spanning 296.5 Mb. We describe the methods used to identify and validate these sequences along with comparisons to other human sequences. The African pan-genome (APG) contigs have been deposited at NCBI under accession PDBU01000000 to provide a better foundation for future analyses of individuals of African ancestry.

In total, we discovered 296.5 Mb of novel DNA distributed across 125,715 sequences assembled from 910 individuals of African descent (Table 1 and Supplementary Fig. 1). We took steps to ensure contaminants and redundant contigs were removed, resulting in a non-redundant set of human contigs representative of the entire study group (Fig. 1). After discovery, we called presence/absence for all APG sequences in each CAAPA sample. A total of 33,599 contigs with a combined length of 81,096,662 bases represented sequences present in at least two individuals in the CAAPA cohort. When alignments above 80% coverage and 90% identity to Chinese and Korean genome assemblies were also considered shared, the number of non-private insertions increased to 61,410, totaling 160,475,353 bases and leaving 64,305 singleton contigs, a ~51% singleton rate. Of the 125,715 APG sequences, 1,548 (total length 4.4 Mb) were anchored to a specific location in the primary GRCh38 assembly. On average, each individual contained 859 of these inserted sequences, with a single sequence being shared among six individuals (Table 2). Placed contigs were shared among more individuals, 196 on average, as shared sequences were more likely to meet the placement criterion in at least one individual.

Table 1 Novel sequences in the African pan-genome
Full size table
Fig. 1: Overview of methods.
Fig. 1
Raw reads are aligned to GRCh38, and unaligned reads are assembled with MaSuRCA. Assembled contigs are then filtered for contaminants with Centrifuge, and contigs shorter than 1 kb are removed (blue box). Assembled contigs are placed based on their mate’s alignment locations when possible by checking whether >95% of mates align to the same location. If such a placement is found, the exact breakpoint is determined via a nucmer alignment to the region for each end of the contig (yellow box). Contig placement locations are then compared between all individuals, nearby placements are clustered, and a representative is chosen. All contigs are then aligned to the representatives to determine which samples contain a given placed insertion. Contigs in or aligning to placed clusters are removed from the unplaced set, and the remaining unplaced contigs are aligned to one another with nucmer to remove redundancy and result in a final nonredundant unplaced set of contigs (purple box). EP, end placed; 1EP, one end placed; 2EP, two end placed; L, left; R, right.

Full size image
Table 2 African pan-genome contig presence/absence statistics
Full size table
We fully resolved the location for 302 of these sequences and resolved the breakpoint of one end of the insertion for the remaining 1,246 (Supplementary Table 1). Placement locations were determined by complementing our methods with results from the PopIns program16, which corroborated many placements and resolved placements for some insertions for which our method was ambiguous (Supplementary Note 1). The remaining sequences (Supplementary Table 2) could not be fully localized; however, mate-linking information pointed to a consistent location for at least one end for an additional 57,655 sequences (Supplementary Table 3). The longest placed sequence was 79,938 bp and appeared in 197 samples, and the longest unplaced sequence was 152,806 bp, which appeared in 11 samples (Table 1). Among all placed sequences, 387 intersected known genes, with placements within exons in 48 distinct genes and placements within introns in an additional 267 genes (some genes contained more than one insertion). Of the 315 genes containing insertions, 292 were named (had names other than ‘hypothetical’ or a non-meaningful identifier). An additional 133 placed insertions and 46 that already intersected a protein-coding gene intersected 142 distinct lncRNAs, 21 of which were named (Supplementary Table 4). A translated BLAST26 search on unplaced sequences against NCBI’s nr database yielded an additional 10,667 contigs hitting a chordate protein with ≥70% identity and an e value less than 1 × 10–10. Placement locations and gene intersections were dispersed throughout the genome, and placed pan-genome elements were found on every chromosome (Fig. 2), in addition to 115 insertions in chromosome-specific ‘random’ sequences and 103 more in ‘unlocalized’ sequences included in the primary assembly of GRCh38.

Fig. 2: African pan-genome contig locations.
Fig. 2
Map of the human genome showing the locations of all African pan-genome contigs, for those that could be placed accurately along one of the chromosomes. Yellow lines represent an intergenic location; blue lines represent insertion points with RNA but not exonic annotations, and red lines indicate intersections within exons. All exon-intersecting insertions are labeled with the gene name. mRNA and lncRNA gene names are reported in Supplementary Table 4. In some cases, insertions are too close together for lines to be resolved; when this occurs within exons, gene names are listed in order by chromosome position. Line width is not to scale.

Full size image
Of our APG contigs, 31,354,079 bases aligned to a GRCh38 ‘patch’ or alternate (ALT) locus as part of an alignment with an identity of ≥80%. An additional 60,202,871 bases aligned to the primary assembly at ≥80% identity; however, most of these alignments covered a small portion of an APG contig and can be explained by the presence of extra copies of small repetitive elements. Data in Supplementary Tables 1 and 2 report alignments to ALT, patch, or primary assembly sequences covering at least 50% of the contig length with ≥80% identity. Requiring that at least 50% of a contig be aligned to any single location in GRCh38 produced a much smaller subset: of the 125,715 contigs, only 17,140 aligned to any part of GRCh38.p10 with a single alignment at ≥80% identity covering ≥50% of the contig length. These 17,140 contigs contain 22,420,979 aligned bases, with 13,770,950 bases being alignments to a reference chromosome. Although very few ALT loci in GRCh38.p10 are tagged with population-specific information, alignments of the CAAPA-specific sequences to these loci suggest an African source for some of these ALT sequences.

In addition to calling presence/absence of our APG insertions in the CAAPA individuals, we performed a similar analysis of 12 European and 12 African individuals from the Simons Genome Diversity Project (SGDP)27. The SGDP individuals varied in the number of APG sequences they contained (Supplementary Table 5), though analyzing the European- versus African-only contigs demonstrated that the APG insertions tend to be more representative of African than European assemblies, despite the admixed nature of the data (Supplementary Note 2).

We additionally aligned all 125,715 pan-genome contigs to recent human assemblies of Chinese (HX1)14 and Korean (KOREF1.0)15 individuals using bwa-mem28. We detected 42,207 contigs totaling 120.7 Mb aligning to either the Korean or Chinese assembly’s with ≥90% identity and ≥80% contig coverage, and matching the Chinese or Korean assembly better than GRCh38. A vast majority of these contigs (32,955) had no alignment at ≥80% identity and ≥50% coverage to GRCh38.p10, indicating that these sequences were not simply divergent from GRCh38, but rather were not present at all (Table 3); an example of such a sequence and its alignments to GRCh38 and HX1 are shown in Fig. 3. This finding suggests these sequences have been lost in the small number of individuals used to create GRCh38, although some of them may reside in the few remaining gaps in the genome.

Table 3 Comparison of African pan-genome contigs to the Chinese and Korean genomes
Full size table
Fig. 3: An example of an alignment that does not meet the 50% coverage, 80% identity threshold for a ‘reasonably good’ alignment to GRCh38.
Fig. 3
The APG contig is shown at the top, with the best consistent alignments to GRCh38 in the middle. The three constituent alignments (blue, red, and yellow segments) cover 801 bases, just under 25% of the contig, with a cumulative weighted identity of 87.9%. CAAPA_113686 has a single near-perfect alignment to a Chinese HX1 contig (delineated by dotted lines) covering over 80% of CAAPA_113686 at over 90% identity. The APG contig also aligns well to the Korean assembly (not shown).

Full size image
While Shi et al. reported 12.8 Mb of novel DNA in the HX1 genome14, we found a total of 68.1 Mb shared by HX1 and the unique sequences in the APG contigs (Table 3). This discrepancy is methodological: the Chinese genome assembly has relatively large scaffolds that were considered unique only if a large proportion of the scaffold failed to align to GRCh38 (Supplementary Note 3).

As an additional check to ensure the APG sequences were not contaminants, we examined what portion of contigs had some match, even just a partial match, to the GRCh38, Korean, or Chinese assemblies. After filtering to retain only query-consistent alignments, 98% of the contigs (123,600) had some portion aligning to either the Chinese, Korean, or GRCh38 assemblies. The Korean assembly had the most alignment, with 123,585 contigs containing an alignment totaling 247.2 Mb of aligned length, or 83% of the total APG sequence, although only 31,033 contigs, totaling 80.9 Mb of alignment, aligned with over ≥90% identity and ≥80% coverage.

Our findings here demonstrate that the standard human reference genome lacks a substantial amount of DNA sequence compared with other human populations. The APG sequences contain 296.5 Mb, equal to 10% of the genome, regions that will necessarily be missed by any efforts relying only on GRCh38 to study human variation, as nearly all studies do at present. Of these 296.5 Mb, 120.7 Mb were shared by the Korean or Chinese populations, suggesting those regions may have been lost more recently or may be rare in the specific populations represented in GRCh38. Overall these results suggest that a single reference genome is not adequate for population-based studies of human genetics. Instead, a better approach may be to create reference genomes for all distinct human populations, which over time will eventually yield a comprehensive pan-genome capturing all of the DNA present in humans.

URL
http://www.genomedenmark.dk/english/about/referencegenome/.

Methods
We used whole-genome shotgun sequence data from 910 individuals whose genomes were sequenced as part of the CAAPA project, available from dbGaP as accession phs001123.v1.p1. The total data set contains 1.19 trillion (1.19 × 1012) 100-bp paired end reads, representing an average of 30–40× coverage for each individual’s genome. Sequencing was performed on an Illumina HiSeq 2000. The subjects in the study were all of African ancestry and were selected from 19 populations across the Americas, the Caribbean, and continental Africa25 (Supplementary Table 6).

Assembly of novel contigs
For each sample, we aligned all reads to GRCh38.p0 using Bowtie2 (ref. 29) and extracted unaligned reads and their mates using Samtools30 (Fig. 1). GRCh38 alternate loci were excluded from the reference index, but were considered later in the process. We then assembled all unaligned reads with the MaSuRCA assembler31; if neither mate in a pair aligned to GRCh38, MaSuRCA treated the reads as paired ends with a fragment size of 300 bp, and if only one mate was unaligned, MaSuRCA treated it as an unpaired read.

We filtered the resulting assemblies to exclude contigs shorter than 1000 bp (Fig. 1) and evaluated all remaining contigs with the Centrifuge metagenomics program32, scanning against the comprehensive NCBI nucleotide database to obtain a taxonomic classification of each contig. We considered any contigs labeled by Centrifuge as non-chordates (for example, bacterial or viral contigs) to be contaminants and removed them from further consideration.

Positioning contigs within GRCh38
We attempted to place the assembled contigs in a precise location in the human genome using mapping information from paired reads (“mates”). We masked contigs with RepeatMasker33 with the low-complexity option off (–nolow) and used Bowtie2 to realign all unaligned reads from read pairs in which only one mate had aligned originally. For each read R aligning within 500 bases of the end of a contig, we examined the alignment of R’s mate to GRCh38 to determine whether the contig had a unique placement in the reference genome. The fragment length for all paired-end libraries was 300 bp; by considering reads within 500 bp of the end of a contig, we reduced the likelihood that one or both of the alignments was a spurious match. Additional details of the sequencing protocols for the CAAPA genomes are described elsewhere25. This process resulted in a pool of linking mates corresponding to the beginning and end of each contig.

We then separated contigs into several groups based on their linking information:

1.
No linking mates existed on either end of the contig; the reads mates did not align to GRCh38.

2.
Placement was unambiguous (or unique) for at least one end of the contig. We define ‘chromosome unambiguous’ to mean >95% of the linking mates linked to the same chromosome. We define ‘region unambiguous’ to mean that of the >95% of mates aligned to the same chromosome, all mates aligned within 2 kb of each other. When both conditions hold, we say placement is unambiguous. These contigs were further divided into two subgroups:

a.
Both ends of the contig were placed unambiguously, or

b.
Only one end was placed unambiguously.

3.
At least one end of the contig was chromosome unambiguous, but neither end was region unambiguous.

4.
Neither end was chromosome unambiguous.

For all contigs in the second group, we used NUCmer34 to align them to the region determined by the linking mates (Fig. 1). If a contig end had one or more consistent exact matches of at least 15 bases (and no inconsistent alignments), we then determined the contig end’s exact insertion location based on alignment coordinates (Supplementary Methods). We permitted an exact two-ended placement only if both ends aligned to the same reference region with the same orientation. The insertion position was either a single breakpoint, if both ends of the contig were placed identically, or a range, if the insertion location of the two ends was not identical. For contigs with only a single end exactly placed, we recorded their exact single-end insertion position and the number of overlapping bases (bases to be trimmed off the end of the contig).

Insertion discovery with PopIns
To supplement the list of placed contigs determined by the procedure above, we ran the PopIns program16, which was used previously for a set of genomes from Icelandic individuals, and was designed to find insertions from a relatively genetically homogenous population. We ran PopIns beginning with the popins merge step, using the cleaned MaSuRCA contig assemblies described above. We ran subsequent PopIns steps as recommended in the PopIns documentation, through the popins place-finish step. PopIns output was converted into a comparable format, and verifiable placements were added to our sets of insertions (Supplementary Methods).

Clustering of placed contigs
Once contig locations were determined for each individual sample, we aligned all insertions to one another and clustered them to determine which contigs represented the same insertion across individuals (Fig. 1).

Clustering two-ended placements
For contigs with both ends placed, we ran BEDtools merge35 to group contigs placed at approximately the same location. We used the -d option with a distance of 10 to allow placements within 10 bases of each other to be combined. We also ran the merge using -d 100, which produced identical results. For each resulting region and contig cluster, we chose the longest contig in the cluster as the cluster’s representative (R), and these representatives formed the initial set of two-end placed contigs, 2EP. Two-ended placement clusters from PopIns were then added to 2EP. We verified clusters by aligning all contigs in each cluster to its representative, R, with default nucmer parameters and removing from the cluster any contigs that did not have any alignments to R. To find the complete set of samples containing each insertion, we then aligned all remaining contigs (including unplaced contigs) to the contigs in the clusters. Any contig aligning with >99% identity that was fully contained within a contig in a cluster C and covered ≥80% of the contig in C was included in C as part of the final set. Contained, 99–100% identical contigs aligning with <80% coverage were also included if they had at least five linking mates and at least 25% of those mates linked to within 5 kb of the placement location. The longest representative contig in each cluster was used as the final insertion sequence for the African Pan-Genome (APG) contig collection (Supplementary Tables 1 and 2).

Clustering one-ended placements
We separated contigs with only one end placed into two groups: (1) contigs where the “left” end aligned to the reference, so that the contig extends into a gap to the right of the placement location; and (2) contigs with their “right” end placed, so the contig extends into a gap to the left of the placement location (Fig. 1). Left and right were determined by the orientation of the chromosomes in GRCh38. We then created clusters separately for the two groups using BEDtools merge (-d 100) as described above, identifying the longest representative R for each group. This formed the initial set of one-end placed contigs, 1EP. Any placements within 100 bases of a two-ended cluster (in the set 2EP) were then removed from 1EP, and each contig in these 1EP clusters was aligned to the representative of the 2EP cluster(s) within 100 bases. If any 1EP contig in the cluster aligned with ≥80% coverage and ≥90% identity to the 2EP contig, the 1EP contig was added to the 2EP cluster.

We then added PopIns one-ended placement clusters to the right and left placements in 1EP (Supplementary Methods). Then for all clusters, we used NUCmer with default parameters to align contigs within each cluster to the representative R. If no alignment was found between a contig and R, the contig was removed from the cluster. We then realigned all other contigs to those in each of these filtered clusters, excluding contigs already determined to be part of a two-ended insertion. Contigs >99% identical over their whole length to any member of a cluster C and covering at least 80% of the contig in C were added to C. Contained, 99–100% identical contigs aligning with less than 80% coverage, were also included if they had at least five linking mates and at least 25% of those mates linked to within 5 kb of the placement location.

We then evaluated the one-ended placements to determine whether two contigs might belong to the same longer insertion, where one contig would ‘fill’ the left side of a gap and the other would fill the right side, possibly meeting in the middle. In some of these cases, the contigs might overlap, allowing us to merge them and create a single, longer insertion sequence. If placement positions were within 500 bases of one another, the sequences were aligned with NUCmer and merged if they were determined to be part of the same insertion (Supplementary Methods). Resultant merged sequences and their clusters were moved to the 2EP set (Fig. 1).

Finally, to remove any potential redundancy from placed clusters, we aligned all representatives from both one- and two-end placed clusters to one another (using nucmer –maxmatch –nosimplify) regardless of placement distance. If two representatives aligned with ≥98% identity, covering ≥95% of one of the contigs, and were placed within 5 kb of one another, these clusters were merged. To determine the representative (and therefore reported placement) of the merged clusters, two-ended placed representatives were favored over one-ended representatives, then our placements were preferred over PopIns, then longer contigs were favored over shorter contigs. By merging only placements within 5 kb, we avoided merging contigs that were similar solely due to repetitive sequences but were unambiguously linked to different locations.

Unplaced contigs
For all unplaced contigs, we ran nucmer –maxmatch –nosimplify with a minimum seed length of 31 (-1 31) and a minimum cluster size of 100 (-c 100) to align all contigs against one another. Contigs contained within another contig and aligning with >95% identity were removed, and if contigs were annotated as identical by show-coords with >97% identity, the smaller of the two was removed. If the ends of two contigs overlapped by at least 100 bases and a third contig was contained within the joined contigs, the contained contig was also removed. Trimming of up to 100 bases was permitted for finding overlaps. Finally, we aligned all resulting unplaced contigs to the placed representatives pre-trimming. If an unplaced contig aligned with ≥80% coverage and ≥90% identity, it was removed from the unplaced set, though it was not added into the placed cluster, as it did not meet the stricter placement or containment criteria used to create the clusters.

In an additional attempt to place more contigs in the reference genome, we repeated the placement procedure described above, this time considering only the subset of linking mates that mapped to GRCh38 with a mapping quality >10, and only attempting to place a contig if the contig end had a minimum of five such linking mates. This mapping quality criterion decreased the overall ambiguity of the putative locations for unplaced contigs (Supplementary Fig. 2); however, this additional placement effort only placed 150 additional contigs. We produced a file of putative linking locations for unplaced contigs by examining separately for each end the linking mates with a mapping quality >10. If >50% of these high-quality linking mates for a given end pointed to the same region, where a region was defined by grouping mates within 2 kb of each other, we reported that region as the putative placement location for that end of the contig, as well as the total number of high-quality mates and the percentage of those mates linking to that location. For this report, the two contig ends were allowed to putatively link to different locations; in such cases both the start and end regions identified are provided, as these are the two most likely placement regions for the contig (Supplementary Table 3). The putative locations include high-copy repetitive sequences that may be underrepresented in GRCh38, and thus are overrepresented as linking locations (Supplementary Note 4 and Supplementary Fig. 3).

Additional screening and analyses
To screen for contaminants missed by Centrifuge, we used the Kraken metagenomics classifier36 on our final set of representative contigs to compare them to a database containing all complete bacterial and archaeal genomes, all viral genomes, selected fungi and protists, human, mouse, and known contaminant sequences. Any unclassified contig or contig hitting something other than mouse or human was further examined by running the blastn program26 to align the contig to NCBI’s nonredundant nucleotide database. We removed all contigs (as likely contaminants) that had alignments to a non-chordate covering >50% of the contig with a BLAST e-value <10–10. We additionally removed a single contig, also an apparent contaminant, hitting Canis familiaris at 90% identity over the entire contig, but lacking any strong matches to primates. As expected, all of these contaminant contigs were found in the set of unplaced contigs. Deleted contaminants were examined for infections of interest, resulting in the incidental discovery of 29 individuals with malaria infections and 1 with human betaherpesvirus (Supplementary Note 5 and Supplementary Table 7).

To ensure the final set of contigs were truly absent from the human reference genome, we realigned all APG contigs to GRCh38.p10 using bwa-mem28 with default parameters. Two separate alignments were performed, one to the primary sequence and one to all patches and alternate loci. We removed any APG contigs with alignments to the primary assembly sequences at or above 90% identity over at least 80% of the contig’s length, regardless of whether they had a better alignment to some alternate locus (Supplementary Methods). In Supplementary Tables 1 and 2, we report the best alignment location for each contig that had at least 50% of the contig aligned to GRCh38.p10 at ≥80% identity. All placed locations were intersected with the NCBI-provided gene annotations, GCF_000001405.36, which is the union of GenBank and RefSeq annotations for GRCh38.p10, and a translated BLAST search (blastx) was run against the comprehensive NCBI protein database to identify potential protein-coding regions in the APG sequences.

Calling presence/absence per sample
Raw contigs from the MaSuRCA assemblies (including contigs under 1 kb) of all 910 individuals were aligned to the final set of APG contigs with bwa-mem using default parameters. Alignments to an APG contig aligning within 300 bp of one another were chained to create longer alignments where possible. Identity of the chained alignment was taken to be the identity of these alignments weighted by length, and coverage was taken to be the total aligned bases over the total APG contig length. If an individual’s raw contig alignments produced an alignment with ≥90% identity and ≥80% coverage to an APG contig, that APG contig was called as present, and a “1” was included in the matrix (Supplementary Data Set 1).

Additionally, for the placed contigs, because we had already determined which individuals contained these sequences, the genotype matrix was supplemented by adding a presence call (“1”) if we had determined that an individual had a contig in the placement cluster. This additional calling allowed increased sensitivity for individuals who had mate placement information available for the insertion, even when the contigs did not meet the identity/coverage criteria used for this presence/absence genotyping. The “genotype” matrix entries indicate presence/absence calls represented as 1 or 0; heterozygous and homozygous genotypes are not differentiated.

To estimate whether the pan-genome would continue to grow as more individuals were sequenced, we randomly sampled varying numbers of individuals within our dataset and used the genotype matrix to determine, in each subset, how much of the APG sequence was present. Each data point was an average of ten random samplings, each with the same number of individuals. The amount of DNA added to the pan-genome appears to increase approximately linearly as the sample size grows, and has not reached an asymptote with 910 individuals (Supplementary Fig. 4).

We additionally called presence/absence of the APG insertions in 12 individuals from six European populations and 12 individuals from six African populations from the Simons Genome Diversity Project (Supplementary Table 5). We assembled these individual’s contigs from raw read data via the same assembly pipeline used for the CAAPA data and then used the resulting MaSuRCA assembly contigs to make the presence/absence calls.

Comparisons to other genomes
We aligned all APG contigs to two additional genome assemblies: a Chinese genome assembly14 and a Korean genome assembly15. All alignments were performed using bwa-mem with default parameters. Because bwa-mem sometimes found multiple distinct alignments for a contig, the best query-consistent set of alignments for each contig was retained, so no part of an APG contig aligned to more than one location in the reference. The best query-consistent set was determined by comparing the sums of alignment length weighted by percent identity. We then filtered these alignments to these genomes, retaining alignments with an overall identity ≥90% that covered ≥ 80% of the contig.

We compared each APG contig’s alignment(s) to the Chinese and Korean genomes to all alignments of the same contig to GRCh38.p10, including patches and alternate loci, obtained as previously described. Among the contigs aligning to the Chinese or Korean genomes, we examined further those with a better alignment (higher identity × coverage) to the Chinese or Korean genome than to GRCh38.p10. We separated these further into two categories, those contigs with a ‘reasonably good’ alignment to GRCh38.p10 (≥50% contig coverage and ≥80% identity for query-consistent sets of alignments within 1 kb of one another), and those lacking reasonably good alignments to GRCh38.p10.

The human population has grown from 1.8 billion a century ago to 7.6 billion
today (averaging approx. 1% increase per annum [1,2]). Population growth tells
only part of the story. Alongside demographic growth, the ecological impacts
per person have risen. Venteret al. estimated the per capita growth in human footprint
on the landscape at approximately 0.52% per year (from 1993 to 2009) [3].
The product of the two—population size and per capita demand—has thus
grown exponentially faster than either on its own.
The burgeoning demand on the resources of the planet has altered threequarters
of Earth’s ice-free surface [4]. Timber and other resource extraction,
agricultural expansion and an increasing incidence of fire have reduced the
intact forested landscape at a rate of 0.57% per year [5]. Harvesting has caused
the global biomass of predatory fish to decline by two-thirds over the last century
[6]. Human land use has led to an estimated loss of 1014 kilograms of organic
carbon from the Earth’s topsoil (approx. 8% of the top 2 m of used land), reducing
productivity and contributing to CO2 emissions [7]. One-quarter of the terrestrial
surface is now considered degraded due to the combined effects of erosion, pollution,
compaction and salinization [8]. Over the past century, temperatures have
increased by 0.858C, sea levels have risen by 0.2 m, and oceans have become 26%
more acidic due to anthropogenic climate change [9]. The resulting pressures on
natural populations have caused a 60% decline in the population size of vertebrate
wildlife between 1970 and 2014, based on a meta-analysis of long-term data from
4005 species [10]. The global scale of geochemical, climatological and biological
changes caused by humans has led scientists to propose a new epoch, the Anthropocene,
to signify the stratigraphically distinct and pervasive impact of humans
on the planet [11].
Beyond the numbers, the world
organisms are favoured that best tolerate the land development,
harvesting, species introductions and environmental changes
caused by humans. Species are at a greater risk of extinction
than pre-human levels, causing selection at the species level
due to the loss of species that are large-bodied, specialist or
otherwise vulnerable to human activities. Although less well
understood, humans have also altered the processes that lead
to the formation of new species, and again this impact is
not affecting all of the world’s species equally. I argue that
humans have altered the course of evolution to a degree that
is unprecedented for a single species in a single century and
close by discussing why this matters.
2. Anthropogenic selection pressures
In the first two chapters of The Origin of Species, Charles
Darwin contrasted selection upon variation under domestication
and under nature. The distinction is becoming
increasingly blurred, with humans selecting for variants
across all species that best tolerate the environmental conditions
that we impose. Here, I discuss several unintended
selection pressures that are altering the evolutionary trajectory
of life on Earth (intended selection pressures, e.g. through antibiotic
application or selective breeding, are not discussed).
My goal is not to give an exhaustive list, but to highlight the
range, potency and idiosyncrasy of selection pressures induced
by humans (figure 1; see also [19] and references therein).
(a) Selection to survive in built landscapes
While urban areas and similarly artificial human-dominated
landscapes only comprise approximately 1% of Earth’s surface
[8,20], the selective pressures induced in cities and other built
landscapes are often intense and multifarious [21]. Building
strikes and domesticated cat predation are now major mortality
sources for birds and other flying animals, with tallies of
800 million collision deaths and 2.4 billion cat predation
events annually in the USA [12]. Such high mortality levels
can induce strong selection pressure to alter behaviour
(a)
(d)
(b)
(e)
(c)
Figure 1. Human-altered selective forces. (a) Selection in built environments: feathers left on a window illustrate the high death toll of birds colliding with buildings
and automobiles [12], selecting against migratory behaviour [13] and for manoeuvrability [14]. (b) Selection to avoid hunting or harvesting: humans target
individuals with preferred traits, selecting against traits such as long ivory tusks [15]. (c) Selection in novel communities: both abiotic and biotic selection pressures
are reshaped when humans bring together species in new assemblages, as found in cardinals nesting in introduced honeysuckles [16]. (d) Selection on dispersal:
fragmented landscapes select for individuals that can remain in hospitable environments, favouring non-dispersing seeds in Crepis sancta [17]. (e) Selection on
inheritance systems: rapid evolution associated with human cultivation can alter the genome, with increased recombination rates and polyploidy found in
many domesticated plants, such as oats [18]. Photographs: (a) Alan Hensel; (b) Sarah Otto; (c) Jeff Whitlock; (d) Susan Lambrecht; (e) Henrik Sendelbach.
rspb.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R. Soc. B 285: 20182047
2
Downloaded from http://rspb.royalsocietypublishing.org/ on November 21, 2018
(e.g. flying speed, perch height), morphology (e.g. wing shape)
and life-history strategies (e.g. age at first reproduction). While
not fully documented, the evidence is accumulating for widespread
evolutionary responses to these selection pressures. For
example, the proportion of sedentary individuals within great
bustard (Otis tarda) populations increased from 17% to 45%
over a 15-year period, with collisions being the major source
of death for migrating individuals [13]. The wing span of cliff
swallows has evolved to be shorter near roads, with roadkilled
swallows having longer wings, consistent with selection
for increased manoeuverability in the face of traffic [14].
While urban evolution has received less attention than
urban ecology, cities are increasingly recognized as highly
altered selective landscapes, providing the opportunity to
study evolutionary shifts that occur in a replicated fashion
across cities [20]. For example, mosquitoes of the molestus
form of Culex pipiens have repeatedly taken advantage of
the increasing availability of subways and other urban underground
areas with readily available human hosts to transition
to an underground life history [22]; the evolution of biting
preferences for humans over birds has concomitantly evolved
independently in Europe [23] and North America [24]. Urban
bird feeders provide an artificial food subsidy, selecting for
shifts in beak size and bite forces in urban house finches
(Carpodacus mexicanus), with correlated changes in bird song
[25]. White clover (Trifolium repens L.) has evolved greater tolerance
to freezing within three of four northeastern North
America cities, a response ascribed to the higher incidence of
freeze– thaw cycles within the urban environment compared
to surrounding non-urban areas [26]. The altered thermal
environment of cities has also been invoked to explain shifts
in migratory behaviour in urban blackbirds, which are more
sedentary than paired rural populations [27].
Even the presence of human activity can induce fear and
behavioural shifts in wildlife. In a meta-analysis of 72 studies,
Gaynor et al. showed a 36% increase in nocturnality among
mammals, essentially a human-avoidance mechanism, with
an even stronger effect in cities, but whether genetic changes
have occurred causing (or responding to) this shift towards
nocturnality is unknown [28]. In other cases, genetic differences
underlying behavioural shifts in response to humans
have been implicated. For example, a study of black swans
(Cygnus atratus) found that more wary individuals avoided
cities and differed genetically at a dopamine receptor gene
associated with fear in animals (DRD4), compared to more
human-tolerant urban swans [29].
(b) Selection to avoid hunting or harvesting
Humans typically hunt or harvest in a selective manner, leading
to ‘unnatural selection’ in the terminology of Allendorf &
Hard [30], which often drives traits in exactly the opposite
direction preferred by humans. Hunting pressures have long
been studied for the selective pressures induced, including an
early analysis by Haldane [31] documenting the decline in
foxes of the silver coat variant, which was highly prized by
trappers. From reductions in tusk size among elephants [15]
to horn size among bighorn sheep [32], hunting selects for
those traits that keep animals out of the cross-hairs [30].
Fishing also induces selection pressure on body size, life
history and morphology often in a manner that makes fish
less catchable and/or less desirable. In an analysis of 143
time series, Sharpe & Hendry found rapid decreases in fish
length at 50% maturity and earlier maturation, changes that
were strongly correlated with the intensity of fishing pressures
[33]. Fishing not only selects on size but also shape and behaviour.
For example, recreational hook-and-line fishing has
selected for smaller mouth gapes [34], while gillnet fishing
has selected against a more active, bold and aggressive genotype
in rainbow trout [35]. These evolutionary responses
generally reduce catch value per unit effort.
Across a broad spectrum of harvested species, rates of
evolutionary change induced by human culling were found
to be three times higher than in natural systems [36]. Reflecting
upon harvesting in general, Sharpe & Hendry [33]
concluded that ‘exploitation is a very strong selective force,
probably outside the normal intensities of selection in most
natural populations’.
(c) Selection in novel communities
Beyond altering the physical environment, humans are altering
the biotic environment faced by species across the planet.
Most obviously, communities are altered through the introduction
of non-native species but also when species’ ranges
shift at different rates in response to anthropogenic habitat
alteration and climate change. Bumblebees in North America
and Europe, for example, ar
may be quite sensitive to variation over time and space in the
surrounding community.
(d) Selection on dispersal
While the above examples focused on trait responses
to selection, human-induced selection pressures can also
shape how species live and move through their environment.
In increasingly fragmented and exploited landscapes, dispersal
and migratory behaviour are subject to different selection
pressures in the Anthropocene.
Theoretically, we expect reduced dispersal rates to evolve
within fragmented but stable patches so that organisms can
remain in hospitable environments [40]. For example, we
found that selection to avoid fishing pressures is expected
to select for fish that remain in marine protected areas, potentially
improving the efficacy of marine reserves over the span
of decades [41]. Empirically, selection against dispersal has
favoured heavy non-dispersing seeds relative to lighter dispersing
seeds of the weedy hawksbeard (Crepis sancta) in
Montpellier, France, where the soil is patchily distributed
among the built environment [17]. Similar changes in dispersal
propensity and distances moved have been observed in
several systems (see citations in [42]).
While reduced dispersal protects local populations in the
short term, dispersal is critical over the long term for recolonizing
patches after local extinction events and for facilitating
genetic exchange and the maintenance of variation. With
increasing patch extinction rates, theory predicts that higher dispersal
rates can be favoured, allowing faster recolonization [43].
Consistent with these expectations, a greenhouse experiment
with Arabidopsis thaliana found that plants evolved to disperse
three times farther across fragmented habitats in only six generations
[44]. Yet increasing dispersal through unsuitable habitats
is risky. To reduce these risks, selection can favour dispersal
behaviours that are more leptokurtic (either staying put or dispersing
far) or more targeted to suitable habitats [42]. A study of
the butterfly Proclossiana eunomia in Belgium found, indeed, that
individuals were more likely to stay within their natal patch in
the most fragmented of the landscapes studied, were more
likely to die if they dispersed, but when they dispersed they
flew faster and straighter through inhospitable habitats
[45,46], although the extent to which this represents a recently
evolved trait is uncertain.
With climate warming, the availability of resources in the
spring is shifting earlier in many parts of the world, with
the timing of migration moving forward by an estimated
2.3 days per decade [47]. Although the mechanisms are
often unknown, evidence for at least some genetic response
to selection is mounting. For example, a study of pink
salmon in Alaska found that migration back into streams
occurred two weeks earlier than 40 years ago, accompanied
by a three-fold decrease in a genetic marker associated with
late dispersal [48].
Migratory behaviour can also be affected by anthropogenic
shifts in resource availability. The popularity of bird
feeders and a warming climate has made for more hospitable
winters for birds in Britain over the past century [49].
In response, a sub-population of blackcap warblers (Sylvia
atricapilla) has evolved a new migratory route to Britain,
with offspring raised in captivity showing different flight
orientation preferences than related birds that migrate to
Spain [50].
Successful dispersal also requires successful breeding in a
new environment. As a consequence, we may expect features
that enhance reproductive assurance, include selfing, asexuality
and perenniality, to evolve when novel sites are being
colonized (Baker’s rule [51]). Indeed, some annual plants
are more self-compatible in their invasive range than where
they are native (Echium plantagineum) and where weedy
than non-weedy (Centaurea solstitialis) [52].
(e) Selection on inheritance systems
The very nature of inheritance can also be shaped by humanaltered
selection pressures. During periods of rapid environmental
change, selection favours increased mutation rates,
particularly within clonal organisms where mutator alleles can
hitchhike along with the beneficial mutations that they generate.
Mutator strains are repeatedly observed in microbes following
exposure to antibiotics but also in response to selection on
virulence and transmissibility (see [53] for examples).
To reduce selective interference among loci, the rates of
sexual reproduction and recombination are also expected to
rise following periods of intense selection. Evidence for the
impact of humans on recombination rates has been found in
both domesticated mammals (see triangles in fig. 1 of [54])
and plants [18].
Plants living in human-disturbed habitats were found to
inbreed more than in undisturbed habitats, altering patterns
of inheritance in many species [55]. In their review, Eckert
et al. [55] attribute this rise in inbreeding to pollen becoming
more limited in disturbed areas, due to either a reduced
abundance of pollinators and/or a lower density of plants.
While these shifts in the mating system cause genetic changes
(e.g. higher homozygosity), how they alter selective pressures
is not yet known. Eckert et al. provide several predictions for
how selection probably shifts in response to pollen limitation,
calling for empirical work linking human disturbance to
floral and mating system evolution.
Genome size has also been inadvertently shaped by human
selective pressures. In many crop species, genome doubling
(polyploidization) has an effect on agriculturally valuable
traits, such as fruit size, with humans selecting and propagating
polyploid varieties of many crops (e.g. blueberries, wheat,
sugar cane, coffee and cotton [56]). Structural changes in the
genome, including gene loss/duplication and chromosomal
loss/duplication, also represent one of the fastest routes by
which organisms adapt to an altered environment. In an experiment
with yeast adapting to high copper concentrations [57],
which is often used in wine grape cultivation, we found
both gene duplications and aneuploidy arose repeatedly and
rapidly (in the course of two weeks) [57]. Similarly, Gallone
et al. [58] found ‘staggering’ levels of copy number variants
and genomic structural changes in domesticated strains of
yeast used in brewing.
While not exhaustive, these examples highlight the dramatic
ways in which human-imposed selection pressures are
altering organisms, down to the very way that they reproduce
their genomes.
4. Extinction in the Anthropocene
In addition to altering the selective forces shaping evolution
within species, humans are also imposing selection at the species
level. Most alarmingly, humans have increased the rate at which
rspb.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R. Soc. B 285: 20182047
4
Downloaded from http://rspb.royalsocietypublishing.org/ on November 21, 2018
species are going extinct and strongly determine which species
are at risk of extinction.
Pre-humans, the background rate of extinction, estimated
from lineage-over-time plots, is 1000 times lower than in the
Anthropocene [59]. Over one in five species of vertebrates
[60], invertebrates [61] and plants [62] are now at risk of extinction.
While currently a minor risk factor, continued climate
change is projected to rival habitat loss as the primary threat
to species at risk by the end of this century [63].
Extinction in the Anthropocene is non-random, which generates
species-level selection against those traits that elevate
extinction risk. Many of the known extinctions over the past
two centuries have been caused by overexploitation, with
humans hunting to extinction species such as the sea mink,
Caribbean monk seal, great auk and passenger pigeon. Such
extinctions permanently remove species prized by humans
(e.g. for the fur of the monk seal) and whose traits make
them particularly susceptible to harvest (such as the flocking
behaviour of the passenger pigeon). Large body size has also
increased extinction rates of species subject to hunting throughout
the past 50 000 years, eliminating half of the large terrestrial
mammalian species [64].
Extinction driven by overexploitation tends to be noticed.
Humans pay attention to species that they hunt and fish, documenting
their demise. Extinction from overexploitation can
also be rapid, with per capita mortality remaining high even
as the targeted population decreases in size if humans search
farther and innovate to continue to capture the resource (e.g.
[65]). An accelerating approach to extinction or ‘extinction
vortex’ can even result if rarity increases the value of the
exploited species to humans [66].
By contrast, many of the unknown extinctions from the past
two centuries, as well as current extinction threats [64], are
caused by habitat loss and degradation. Unlike overexploitation,
extinction caused by habitat change can be a prolonged
process [67], with at-risk species persisting in remaining
patches of suitable habitat. Indeed, a decelerating approach
to extinction is expected if habitat most desirable to humans
is converted first, leaving remnant patches that are protected,
hard to access or difficult to develop where species can persist.
While species with patchy ranges may persist over the short
term, they are subject to declining genetic diversity and localized
ecological disasters that place them at risk of extinction
in the long term. As a consequence, anthropogenic habitat
change is thought to have generated a substantial extinction
debt (e.g. [67,68]), which may take years to millennia to realize,
depending on the extent of habitat loss [67]. The extinction
debt, along with the fact that anthropogenic habitat change
endangers many rare species that are unknown to science
[69], makes it challenging to document fully which species
are going extinct and what traits are being lost.
By examining which types of taxa are most endangered,
however, studies have shown that the extinction debt is not
borne evenly among species. Species with small ranges are particularly
threatened [69]. By contrast, widespread species,
generalists, dispersive species and human commensals are,
on average, less prone to extinction [70]. Other less obvious
character traits have also been shown to be associated with
an increased threat of extinction. By comparing the IUCN
red-list status of species, Vamosi & Vamosi [71] found that
plants with separate sexes (dioecy) are more likely to be at
risk of extinction than hermaphroditic sister clades, potentially
because pollen flow and seed dispersal are more easily
disrupted when male and female functions reside in different
plants. Woody plants [71] and tropical plants [72] are also
more at risk. In birds, species with larger body sizes [73],
lower fecundity [73] and larger testes size (an indicator of stronger
post-mating sexual selection) [74] are more likely to be
endangered, potentially because such species are less able to
recover when driven to small population sizes.
Humans are thus reshaping the living world through
non-random extinction, leading to a rise in frequency
of widespread species that tolerate human activities,
a fragmented environment, and an altered climate.
5. Speciation in the Anthropocene
Relative to extinction, less is known about how humans
have altered the rate of speciation. Estimates of background
speciation rates can also be estimated from lineage-over-time
plots and from intervals between nodes in a phylogeny
(especially nearer the present), suggesting that species’ splits
occur at roughly every 2 Myr, on average, per lineage [75].
Estimating modern speciation rates is more challenging. It is
easier to document the loss of a species previously known to
be present than to witness the birth of a species, especially
when divergence is so recent that few characters distinguish
the new species from its parent(s), leading to cryptic young
taxa [76].
While the effect of humans on the rate of speciation
is unknown, many examples exist of how humans have altered
the speciation process [77]. The mechanisms underlying these
impacts can be roughly categorized as human-altered niches,
human-altered contact and human-altered selection.
(a) Human-altered niches
Human activities have altered and created novel niche
space. Crop domestication and the spread of agriculture, in
particular, have generated novel plant hosts for many insects
and pathogens. One of the best documented cases of contemporary
speciation is Rhagoletis pomonella, following a host
switch to domesticated apples [78]. Similarly, the introduction
of invasive honeysuckle (Lonicera) from Asia provided a novel
niche that favoured the spread of a newly formed homoploid
hybrid species of Rhagoletis (between R. mendax and R. zephyria)
[79]. Host specialization onto different crops has also
driven speciation in fungi, with Rhynchosporium, for example,
diversifying into at least three pathogenic species specialized
on different cereals in the past 4000 years [80].
Contaminated sites, e.g. mine tailings, can also promote
speciation because of the strong ecological selection for locally
adapted genotypes. For example, the sweet vernal grass, Anthoxanthum
odoratum L. has adapted to heavy metals surrounding a
mine active in the mid- to late 1800s. This local adaptation has
been accompanied by a shift in flowering time and an increase
in selfing rate, generating substantial reproductive isolation
that has been maintained over the past 40 years [81]. Adaptation
to copper-heavy mine tailings has also driven both local
adaptation and reproductive isolation in Mimulus gutatus [82].
Climate change is also opening up niches in locations that
previously were inaccessible. The blackcap warblers that now
migrate to the UK are beginning to show evidence of assortative
mating and genetic differentiation from those that
migrate to Spain [83], exhibiting the initial steps of speciation
in under a century.
rspb.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R. Soc. B 285: 20182047
5
Downloaded from http://rspb.royalsocietypublishing.org/ on November 21, 2018
Humans are, however, also homogenizing environments
that previously were heterogeneous, eroding the potential for
speciation. For example, the nesting habitats of benthic and
limnetic sticklebacks in Enos Lake in western Canada were
homogenized after the invasion of signal crayfish in the
1980s. As a consequence, the two young stickleback species
collapsed into a single hybrid swarm [84]. Similarly, the
narrowing of the visual environment in Lake Victoria due to
human-caused eutrophication has led to the loss of mate preferences
that maintain species, with a fourfold reduction in
the number of species in the most turbid waters [85].
(b) Human-altered contact
The global mixing of species by either intentional or accidental
introduction by humans is also providing novel opportunities
for speciation. In particular, hybrid speciation is facilitated
between species that were previously isolated. A prime example
is the grass Spartina alterniflora, native to eastern North America
and introduced by humans both to western North America and
Europe [86]. Hybridization with native S. foliosa in California has
led to a hybrid swarm, while hybridization with S. maritima in
France and separately in England generated sterile hybrids
(Spartina  neyrautii and S.  townsendii, respectively). Polyploidization
of S.  townsendii subsequently produced Spartina
anglica, a fertile and highly invasive species that vigourously
colonizes and alters sedimentation in salt marshes [86].
Spartina illustrates the opposing effects that human introductions
are likely to have on speciation. On the one hand,
species brought into secondary contact by humans can collapse
into a hybrid swarm when reproductive isolation is
not sufficiently strong (as in western North America [86]),
hindering speciation. On the other hand, crosses between
more isolated species can facilitate hybrid speciation (as in
Europe [86]).
Reproductive character displacement is another potential
evolutionary outcome of human-caused secondary contact,
where mating systems evolve to reduce gene flow between partially
incompatible species when in contact. For example,
mating to males of the mosquito Aedes albopictus effectively
sterilizes females of Ae. aegypti, leading to population declines
of the latter where they overlap in range in the Americas,
where both species are introduced and invasive [87]. Ae. aegypti
have recently evolved lower rates of interspecific mating in sympatry
with Ae. Albopictus than in allopatry, a tell-tale sign of
reproductive character displacement, reducing gene flow and
allowing Ae. aegypti to persist [87].
In addition to increasing contact rates between previously
isolated populations, humans are also decreasing contact
rates between previously connected populations. Roads,
dams, deforestation and other habitat alterations act as
anthropogenic vicariance events. Evidence is accumulating
that such human-caused isolation events have led to genetic
and morphological divergence (e.g. in sticklebacks following
the construction of a dam in Iceland [88]; in Geoffroy’s
tamarin following the construction of the Panama canal
[89]; see also references in [90]). Evidence that such isolation
has led to allopatric speciation is, however, lacking, likely
reflecting the slower accumulation of reproductive isolating
barriers in the absence of strong ecological selection. In the
long-term, the fragmentation of species ranges into isolated
populations may also increase the rate of speciation, for
those species capable of persisting.
(c) Human-altered selection
Finally, speciation rates may be affected by the changing
nature and strength of selection in the Anthropocene. With
more intensive selection, adaptive mutations are expected
to become fixed in different populations at a higher rate,
decreasing the expected time until an incompatibility arises
between populations according to the ‘snowball’ model of
speciation [91].
Potentially even more important than the number of
substitutions is the nature of those substitutions. With strong
selection induced in human-altered environments [33], genetic
changes are more likely to involve large-effect mutations,
which our recent research suggests is more likely to lead to speciation.
Why? Large-effect mutations are more likely to have
stronger deleterious side effects (either due to pleiotropy
or hitchhiking) that contribute to reduced fitness of inter-population
hybrids. Furthermore, the chance that offspring
overshoot a fitness optimum is increased when crossing two
lines carrying different large-effect beneficial mutations.
The hypothesis that strong selection is likely to shorten the
time to speciation is consistent with our laboratory experiments
with yeast. After only days of exposure to the fungicide
nystatin, we have observed that independently adapted strains,
bearing different large-effect mutations, show reduced ‘hybrid’
fitness (Dobzhansky–Muller incompatibilities) in 33–50% of
the crosses [92]. Modelling also confirms this hypothesis. By
moving a fitness optimum rapidly versus slowly, we find that
large-effect mutations that accumulate in a rapidly changing
environment generate stronger reproductive incompatibilities
than small-effect mutations that accumulate when the environment
changes slowly, even when the populations have reached
the same optimum [93].
Similarly, genetic analyses of the Mimulus gutatus populations
adapted to mine tailings show that the reproductive
incompatibility with surrounding populations is associated
with a major-effect mutation at the Tol1 locus [82]. In this
case, the strong selection allowed hitchhiking of a linked
mutation at the Nec1 locus that is thought to be responsible
for the incompatibility.
In summary, there are good reasons to expect more rapid
speciation in the Anthropocene [90], particularly in groups
evolving into new niches and responding rapidly to selection.
In other groups, however, human-caused secondary contact,
habitat degradation and environmental homogenization are
causing the collapse of what might otherwise have remained
or become good species. The net impact of humans on speciation
rates, even whether that impact is positive or negative,
remains unknown.
6. Conclusion
Humans have altered the course of evolution. The pervasiveness
of evolutionary impacts, from genome structure to
dispersal rates, on species throughout the globe should make
us take pause. Particularly troubling is the elevated extinction
rate associated with human activities, which is disproportionately
leading to the loss of large-bodied, specialist,
narrow-ranged species, as well as species that are otherwise
vulnerable to humans.
While the impacts of humans on extinction rates have rightfully
received substantial attention, humans are also reshaping
the selection pressures within species, favouring organisms
rspb.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R. Soc. B 285: 20182047
6
Downloaded from http://rspb.royalsocietypublishing.org/ on November 21, 2018
that are human-tolerant over those that are human-sensitive,
whether sensitive to development, harvesting, anthropogenic
climate change, etc. It is worth emphasizing that, in many
cases, human-associated selection pressures can be strong,
stronger than is typically measured in less impacted systems
[36]. There are theoretical reasons to expect that strong selection
imposed by humans will lead, as a side consequence, to fitness
loss in other attributes of survival and reproduction, with genetic
substitutions expected to reduce fitness on average by
roughly half the strength of selection imposed by humans on
those loci [94]. From morphological changes, such as wing
shape and body size, to behavioural changes, such as biting
preferences and migration routes, our world is evolving less
under the pressures of natural selection and more under the
pressures of anthropogenic selection.
While human activities can also facilitate speciation (e.g. to
novel host plants), widespread introductions and movement of
species, as well as homogenization of environments, have led
to the collapse of incipient species. More research is needed
to determine the net effect of humans on speciation rates. If
negative, then the net loss of biodiversity is even higher than
currently considered if we include species that are not forming
due to human activities, adding a speciation debt to the
extinction debt.
Why does it matter that humans are altering the course of
evolution more intensely than has any other species? First,
we will leave a legacy to future generations that is less natural
and less wild than the biological world into which we were
born. This is not simply because of the loss of species but
also because of the imposition of a common selective pressure
to tolerate human activities. Second, by moving individuals
around the world and homogenizing environments, we may
well be reducing the rate of speciation. As a consequence, it
will take longer for the planet to recover from the current
extinction crisis, and certain classes of species may be particularly
prone to loss but not recovery (e.g. large-bodied animals).
Finally, evolutionary changes in response to human pressures
have policy implications, as diseases and their vectors become
better adapted to life within our cities, pests become better
adapted to our crops and our prey become better adapted to
our means of harvesting. As we have witnessed with the evolution
of antibiotic resistance, humans may impose selection,
but we will often not retain the upper hand.
Background
Te relationship between genome complexity and organism
complexity is one of the core topics in genomics
and evolutionary systems biology. However, measuring
genome complexity is not a simple task. Gene numbers
show no obvious correlation with organism complexity,
a phenomenon referred to as the G-value paradox
[1–3]. To explain this paradox, biologists have separately
presented numerous genome complexity factors [3–9]
related to genome sequence and the structural and functional
features of genes and their products. However,
as each study focuses on one or only a few factors, one
cannot obtain a global understanding of the factors contributing
to genome complexity. Additionally, the various
contributing factors are uncategorized, further complicating
and confusing their relationships.
In this study, the intrinsic properties of genes/gene
products related to genome complexity were categorized
into two classes: gene complexity and gene age grade.
And we try to answer the fundamental question about
how the complex and young genes contribute to the formation
of organism complexity. It is through the process
of development that genome complexity is represented
as phenotypic complexity at the organismal level [10].
Development is a complex and dynamic process involving
diferentiation from a single embryonic stem cell to
various terminal diferentiated somatic cells. During
this process, organism complexity gradually increases
because of an increase in the number of cell types constituting
the whole body [11–13]. At the adult stage, organism
complexity is maintained by specifc gene expression
patterns among diferent organs, tissues and cell types
(OTCs) of the adult body. Te complexity of the organism
is determined at two levels. Te frst level comprises
the diversity of spatiotemporal states, i.e., diferent specifc
developmental time points or OTCs. If an organism
contains much more diferent OTCs, it can be regarded
as a more complex organism. Te second level is the
complexity of each spatiotemporal state. If two organisms
have the same number of OTCs, the diference in complexity
between them is determined by the complexity of
each individual OTC in each organism. To explore how
these genomic complexity-contributing factors afect an
organism’s phenotypic complexity, both levels should be
considered simultaneously.
We classifed genes, including protein-coding genes
(PCGs) and miRNA genes, according to the abovementioned
genome complexity factors, and explored
the relationship between gene complexity and age
degree. We then investigated the over- and under-representation
of each class of genes in a certain developmental
stage/OTC (based on the gene expression data
listed in Additional fle 1: Table S1) compared with all
the genes in the genome. In addition, we calculated the
tissue-/stage-specifcity and compared this across each
class of genes. Based on these results, a general pattern
for the utilization of the genome complexity factors was
inferred.
In addition, the relationship between gene age grade
and the expression pattern during development may
provide new clues to the understanding of the relationship
between evolution and development. In this fled,
there are two major models related to evolution–development
connection. Te frst one is the ‘funnel-like’
model, which was frstly proposed by von Baer in 1828
[14]. In this model, developmental similarities are highest
in the earliest stages of embryogenesis and lowest at
the end of development. Some recent studies also supported
this model based on the analysis of genome-wide
gene expression [15, 16]. In 1994, Duboule proposed
another model [17], the ‘hourglass’ model, in which the
middle stage of embryonic development show the most
conserved morphological pattern, but not the early stage.
During this middle stage, the body plan is being set. Tis
model was also supported by the high-throughput gene
expression analysis [15, 18–21]. Based on our results,
we obtained some new insights into this fundamental
question and the probable explanations for the ‘paradox’
between these two models.
Results
The classifcation of the factors contributing to genome
complexity
To give a clear and general conception of the factors contributing
to genome complexity, we categorized them
into two classes for the frst time (Fig. 1). Te frst class
is the number of genes and non-genic elements. Te
gene number is the same as the original understanding
of genome complexity. Te second class is the intrinsic
properties of the genes or non-genic elements. In this
study, due to the data available, we mainly focus on the
intrinsic properties of genes, which include two generalized
categories: gene complexity and gene age degree.
Gene complexity factors include the gene length, number
of cis-regulatory motifs and trans-regulatory molecules
[3], and the complexity features of the gene’s product,
such as the length [6], the number of structural or functional
units (e.g., protein domains) [5, 6], the number of
subcellular locations and the complexity of its interaction
with other molecules. Te factors for gene age degree
include the age of the genes and its protein domains,
the last duplication time of the genes. Te young genes
contribute substantially to the novel morphological and
functional characteristics of complex organisms during
evolution [22–29].
Yang et al. EvoDevo (2018) 9:22 Page 3 of 19
The relationship between gene complexity and age degree
In this study, gene complexity and age degree were
defned as the two basic properties of a gene. Gene complexity
refers to the complexity of the sequence, structure
and function of one gene, whereas gene age degree refers
to the evolutionary novelty of one gene in a certain species
compared with other species across the phylogenetic
tree. Both of them contribute to genome complexity.
Four factors were selected to represent the complexity
of a gene: gene length (GL), cis-regulatory module number
(CRMN) [6, 30], protein length (PL) [6] and domain
number including repeats in a protein (DNIR) [5, 6] (see
Additional fle 2: Table S2 for the detailed values for each
gene). We confrmed that these gene complexity factors
correlate well with organism complexity, measured with
cell type number within the organism [2, 31]. In total, 46
eukaryotes were used for this analysis (Additional fle 1:
Fig. S1a–c, Table S3).
To explore the role of complex genes in the formation
of organism complexity, we then investigated the functional
characteristics of complex genes. Compared with
the simple genes, the complex genes tended to take part
in developmental and multicellular processes (Additional
fle  1: Fig. S1d). Interestingly, certain regulatory
processes, such as signal transduction, were over-represented
in simple proteins in the mouse data, due in part
to the olfactory receptor family, a large family with special
expression and function characteristics [32]. Among
the 870 short genes (≤3200  bp) participating in signal
transduction, 693 were olfactory receptor-encoding
genes (Additional fle  3: Table  S4). In view of knockout
phenotype of genes, we found that complex genes tended
to have multiple knockout phenotypes (Additional
fle 1: Fig. S1e1–e4 for mouse data, and Additional fle 4:
Table S5 for other species). Regarding pathways, the complex
genes tended to be involved in multiple KEGG pathways.
Almost half of the high-complexity genes of mouse
participated in two or more KEGG pathways (Additional
fle 1: Fig. S1f1–f4). We further analyzed what pathways
are over-represented in complex genes compared with
all the genes participating in at least one pathway. Most
of these pathways are signaling pathways, such as the
MAPK, calcium, Erb
Yang et al. EvoDevo (2018) 9:22 Page 4 of 19
(DOT) [5] (Additional fle 2: Table S2). Two types of GOT
were obtained from EnsemblCompara [34] with slight
correction (see “Methods” for detailed information) and
a consensus gene age dataset [33] named as GOT_Ens
and GOT_Mode, respectively. Similarly, the spearman
correlation between each pair of these three novelty
factors was calculated (Table 1). Taking mouse data
as an example, the correlation was strongest between
GOT_Mode and DOT (R=0.87), but weakest coefcient
(between DOT and LDT) was only 0.4. Venn diagrams of
the three classes of young genes were also used to visualize
their detailed relationship (Additional fle 1: Fig. S2d).
As a result, there are about 20.6–46.5% category-specifc
young genes (Additional fle  1: Fig. S2e), and they also
have distinct specifc functional features (see supplementary
results and Fig. S2f in Additional fle 1 for details).
Tese results indicated that the three age degree factors
are also complementary to each other to some extent.
Tese four complexity factors (GL, CRMN, PL and
DNIR) and four age degree factors (GOT_Ens, GOT_
Mode, LDT and DOT) were used in the further analyses.
First, we focused on the relationship between gene
complexity and age degree, the two basic intrinsic properties
of one gene, and found that nearly all of the complexity
factors correlated negatively with the age degree
factors; that is, the older genes tend to be more complex,
whereas the younger genes tend to be simpler (Table 1).
Tis comprehensive analysis, using multiple factors of
gene complexity and age degree, confrmed the previous
conclusions about the relationship between gene age
and protein length [35, 36]. Our results suggest that this
kind of correlation is valid across each pair factor of gene
Table 1 Results of the spearman correlation analysis for each pair of gene complexity and age factors of mouse
The gene complexity factors used in this study included GL (gene length), CRMN (cis-regulatory module number), PL (protein length) and DNIR (domain number
including repeats in one protein). The gene age factors included GOT (gene origin time), LDT (last duplication time) and DOT (domain origin time). Correlation
coefcients (R) and P values are shown in the table
Factor pairs M. musculus G. gallus D. rerio D. melanogaster C. elegans
R P R P R P R P R P
GL vs. PL 0.58 <1E−323 0.57 <1E−323 0.58 <1E−323 0.79 <1E−323 0.80 <1E−323
GL vs. CRMN 0.46 <1E−323 0.20 2.6E−126 0.04 4.4E−10 0.13 2.5E−50 −0.12 1.3E−63
GL vs. DNIR 0.33 <1E−323 0.34 <1E−323 0.36 <1E−323 0.42 <1E−323 0.38 <1E−323
PL vs. CRMN 0.27 <1E−323 0.05 2.4E−10 0.01 2.4E−02 0.04 2.2E−07 −0.09 6.1E−39
PL vs. DNIR 0.52 <1E−323 0.53 <1E−323 0.50 <1E−323 0.48 <1E−323 0.49 <1E−323
CRMN vs. DNIR 0.17 3.0E−138 0.01 2.8E−01 0.01 1.7E−01 0.11 3.3E−41 −0.03 3.9E−05
GOT_Ens vs. GOT_Mode 0.64 <1E−323 0.47 <1E−323 0.47 <1E−323 0.74 <1E−323 0.64 <1E−323
GOT_Ens vs. LDT 0.65 <1E−323 0.52 <1E−323 0.42 <1E−323 0.76 <1E−323 0.87 <1E−323
GOT_Ens vs. DOT 0.60 <1E−323 0.51 <1E−323 0.45 <1E−323 0.64 <1E−323 0.67 <1E−323
GOT_Mode vs. LDT 0.67 <1E−323 0.37 <1E−323 0.35 <1E−323 0.57 <1E−323 0.50 <1E−323
GOT_Mode vs. DOT 0.87 <1E−323 0.39 <1E−323 0.43 <1E−323 0.67 <1E−323 0.60 <1E−323
LDT vs. DOT 0.40 <1E−323 0.32 <1E−323 0.22 2.9E−280 0.48 <1E−323 0.56 <1E−323
GL vs. GOT_Ens −0.40 <1E−323 −0.23 7.9E−175 −0.30 <1E−323 −0.27 1.6E−230 −0.34 <1E−323
GL vs. GOT_Mode −0.28 <1E−323 −0.16 3.3E−83 −0.17 1.3E−168 −0.23 8.0E−165 −0.27 <1E−323
GL vs. LDT −0.44 <1E−323 −0.16 4.2E−80 −0.25 <1E−323 −0.29 7.6E−262 −0.30 <1E−323
GL vs. DOT −0.22 <1E−323 −0.06 7.7E−12 −0.08 2.7E−38 −0.19 8.0E−115 −0.32 <1E−323
PL vs. GOT_Ens −0.35 <1E−323 −0.25 8.5E−209 −0.20 2.2E−230 −0.32 5.6E−321 −0.41 <1E−323
PL vs. GOT_Mode −0.20 2.0E−175 −0.14 1.0E−63 −0.10 2.2E−59 −0.30 8.3E−278 −0.32 <1E−323
PL vs. LDT −0.34 <1E−323 −0.17 1.6E−97 −0.13 2.8E−103 −0.32 <1E−323 −0.38 <1E−323
PL vs. DOT −0.21 2.0E−213 −0.09 1.1E−27 −0.06 3.4E−23 −0.23 5.2E−164 −0.40 <1E−323
CRMN vs. GOT_Ens −0.27 <1E−323 0.06 1.1E−14 −0.03 2.3E−06 −0.13 7.7E−54 0.01 3.4E−01
CRMN vs. GOT_Mode −0.13 2.0E−78 −0.01 4.5E−01 −0.04 1.7E−09 −0.10 1.4E−34 −0.04 7.6E−10
CRMN vs. LDT −0.31 <1E−323 0.04 3.9E−06 −0.04 6.8E−10 −0.18 1.1E−106 0.01 5.6E−02
CRMN vs. DOT −0.17 <1E−323 0.04 1.9E−07 −0.02 6.7E−04 −0.08 3.5E−19 −0.01 3.6E−01
DNIR vs. GOT_Ens −0.34 <1E−323 −0.30 5.6E−302 −0.25 <1E−323 −0.57 <1E−323 −0.61 <1E−323
DNIR vs. GOT_Mode −0.20 2.0E−173 −0.18 5.7E−103 −0.19 7.1E−207 −0.50 <1E−323 −0.45 <1E−323
DNIR vs. LDT −0.22 6.0E−240 −0.14 2.2E−68 −0.10 3.5E−61 −0.49 <1E−323 −0.55 <1E−323
DNIR vs. DOT −0.36 <1E−323 −0.31 1.2E−312 −0.32 <1E−323 −0.61 <1E−323 −0.79 <1E−323
Yang et al. EvoDevo (2018) 9:22 Page 5 of 19
complexity and age degree and valid across the representative
species.
To explore the detailed relationship between them,
all of the genes were partitioned into several classes
according to each gene complexity factor and each age
degree factor. Based on GOT_Ens and GOT_Mode,
all of the PCGs were classifed into four (Fig. 2a, e, i, m,
q) or fve (Fig.  2b, f, j, n, r) age classes (see Additional
fle  1: Table  S7 for the names of age grades). According
to the four gene complexity factors, GL, CRMN,
PL and DNIR, all of the PCGs were divided into fve or
four complexity categories, respectively. Te proportion
of the most complex PCGs in each age degree category
were calculated and divided by the expected percentage
(background), which was the percentage of each type
of complex PCGs in the genome of each species (Fig. 2,
Additional fle 6: Table S8). Interestingly, mid-age genes,
e.g., the genes originating from the common ancestor of
Bilateria (Fig. 2a) or Eumetazoa (Fig. 2b), have the largest
proportion of high-complexity genes. Te analyses based
on other 4 representative species revealed the same
conclusion (Fig.  2e, f, i, j, m, n, q, r). We assumed this
Fig. 2 Distribution of complex genes across diferent age categories in the fve species. a–d for Mm, Mus musculus; e–h for Gg, Gallus gallus; i–l for
Dr, Danio rerio; m–p for Dm, Drosophila melanogaster; q–t for Ce, Caenorhabditis elegans. The percentages of complex protein-coding genes (PCGs)
in each age degree category were calculated and divided by the expected percentage. Heat map showing the fold enrichment values obtained
from this division. The expected percentage was the percentage of each type of complex PCGs in the genome of each species, represented as
‘background (%)’ in the right region of the fgure. Gene complexity was measured by gene length (GL), cis-regulatory module number (CRMN),
protein length (PL) and domain number including repeats in one protein (DNIR) for each species, and the results of the most complex PCGs are
shown in the fgure. The full result data, including other complexity degrees, are in Additional fle 1: Table S8. The abbreviations of age degree
names: GOT_Mode, gene origin time from the consensus mode gene age dataset, GOT_Ens, gene origin time from the EnsemblCompara
database; LDT, last duplication time; and DOT, the origin time of the youngest domain in one protein. The abbreviations of the grades for each
age type of each species are listed in Additional fle 1: Table S7. For the convenience of presentation, the V grades of the LDT and DOT of Mus
musculus were the combination of V and VI grades shown in Additional fle 1: Table S7. The over- or under-representation strengths of the complex
genes in each age degree category were estimated and are represented by −log (p) or log (p), respectively (see “Methods”). All of the PCGs in
each species were used as the background in the over-/under- representation analysis. The symbols in this fgure: ++++, over-represented
and P<1E−50; +++, over-represented and 1E−50≤P<1E−10; ++, over-represented and 1E−10≤P<0.05; +, over-represented but P>0.05;
−−−−, under-represented and P<1E−10; −−−, under-represented and 1E−50≤P<10-10; −−, under-represented and 10-10≤P<0.05; −,
under-represented but P>0.05
Yang et al. EvoDevo (2018) 9:22 Page 6 of 19
phenomenon is the outcome of the balance of two diferent
trends (Additional fle  1: Fig. S3). In the frst trend,
one gene became increasingly complex during evolution,
so the older genes are more complex, whereas the life
spans of the younger genes are too short to become complex;
in the second trend, complex organisms produced
new complex genes. For example, during the emergence
of Eumetazoa, in particular the emergence of Bilateria,
probably many new complex genes emerged to meet the
complex function requirements, such as the development
of three germ layers.
All of the PCGs were then partitioned into several
categories according to the last duplication time (LDT,
Fig. 2c, g, k, o, s) and protein domain origin time (DOT,
Fig. 2d, h, l, p, t), and the proportion of the most complex
genes in each category was then compared. Te genes
with mid-age LDTs (grades II or III) and the genes encoding
mid-age protein domains (grade III) have the highest
proportion of complex genes. Te results were similar to
the conclusion that the mid-age genes showed the highest
proportion of complex genes mentioned above.
Besides protein-coding genes, noncoding regions
also contribute substantially to genome complexity and
organism complexity [9, 37]. Tus, the utilization of complex
and young noncoding RNA genes was also explored.
So far, only miRNA genes were involved in our analysis
because of the lack of enough data of the complexity and
gene age degree of other noncoding RNA genes. miRNA
mainly functions in RNA silencing and posttranscriptional
regulation of gene expression [38, 39]. Te functional
complexity of a miRNA gene is mainly determined
by the complexity of the regulatory network in which the
miRNA targets to various mRNAs. Te number of targets
of a certain miRNA is used to represent the complexity
degree of a miRNA gene. Te age of a miRNA gene
is inferred from the miRNA family database (miFam.dat)
in miRbase. Te relationship between the age grade and
the number of targets of a miRNA was investigated. As a
result, the mid-age miRNAs, which originated from the
common ancestor of mammalian, have the highest proportion
of the most complex miRNAs (Additional fle 1:
Fig. S4). Tis result is consistent with the conclusion from
protein-coding genes, indicating the trend that mid-age
genes have the highest proportion of complex genes is a
general trend across diferent types of genes.
To further explore the diferent roles of complex genes
with diferent age degrees in the formation of organism
complexity, we then focused on the functional diferences
among them. Taking mouse data as an example (Additional
fle  1: Fig. S5a), the old complex genes generally
took part in critical and primitive cellular processes, such
as basic metabolism, DNA replication, RNA processing,
protein translation, oxidation reduction and transport.
Te complex genes of medium age (grades II and III)
took part mainly in biological processes specifc to multicellular
organisms, such as development, signal transduction,
cell communication, growth, cell motility. Te
young complex genes were mainly over-represented in
transcription regulation. In the view of knockout phenotype
of genes, we found that the Bilateria-specifc (grade
II) complex genes tended to have multiple knockout phenotypes
(Additional fle 1: Fig. S5b1–b4). As the number
of knockout phenotypes of a gene can approximately represent
the gene’s functional complexity, the Bilateria-specifc
complex genes showed a stronger multifunctionality
or pleiotropy trend. Regarding pathways, the Bilateriaspecifc
complex genes had the highest proportion of the
genes involved in multiple pathways (Additional fle  1:
Fig. S5c1–c4). Tese results indicated that compared
with other genes, the complex genes with medium age
tend to facilitate the formation of organism complexity.
General utilization patterns of gene complexity/novelty
factors in certain spatiotemporal states
Both of the complex and young genes contribute to complexity
at genome and organism levels. Along with the
selective expression of complex and young genes, both
factors can be represented at the phenotypic level. Here,
we focused on the general utilization patterns of the gene
complexity/age factors in diferent stages of development
and diferent adult OTCs. We classifed PCGs into several
categories according to the preceding parameters and
calculated the over- or under-representation strength of
each gene category in each developmental stage and each
adult OTC.
Based on gene length (GL, Fig. 3a, c, e, g, i), all of the
PCGs were classifed into one of the fve complexity categories.
We found that complex genes were signifcantly
over-represented in nearly all of the stages of development
of the fve species, increasing from the beginning
of the phylotypic stage, a developmental phase during
which the embryonic morphology of all species within
a phylum is particularly similar [10, 15, 19, 21, 40].
Te over-representation peaked at the late stage of the
organogenesis stage (for example, E14.5 in mouse) and
then decreased a little. Te dynamic trend of under-representation
of simple genes (low complexity) was similar
to the over-representation of the complex genes (Fig. 3a,
c, e, g, i). Similar results can be obtained from the analysis
of other 3 complexity factors, CRMN, PL and DNIR
(Additional fle  1: Fig. S6). Tese results indicated that
complex genes are utilized preferentially at each time
point of embryonic development, contributing to the
complexity of each state. In particular, the complex genes
are much more over-represented during the middle and 
Yang et al. EvoDevo (2018) 9:22 Page 7 of 19
late stages, which substantially contributes to the increasing
complexity of the embryo.
For gene age degree, based on GOT, LDT and DOT, the
PCGs were divided into several classes (Fig. 3b, d, f, h, j,
Additional fle 1: Fig. S7). It is obvious that the old genes
are signifcantly over-represented during the entire process
of embryonic development, particularly in the early
stages, while the young genes are under-represented in all
stages. Regardless of whether gene age degree was represented
by GOT, LDT or DOT, similar conclusions were
obtained (see supplementary description in Additional
fle  1 for more DOT-related results). In addition, we
found an interesting species-specifc phenomenon. During
embryonic development of D. melanogaster and C.
elegans, the over-representation strength of the sub-old
age genes (Bilateria grade) was stronger than the oldest
genes (Opisthokonta) (Fig.  3h, j). Tis trend is diferent
from other 3 species (Fig.  3b, d, f), suggesting the relatively
higher-level requirement of the bilaterian-specifc
genes in the embryonic development of Protostomia.
Interestingly, there is an obvious correlation between
the time point change of the over- or under-representation
strength and the order of gene origin time (Fig. 3b,
d, f, h, j, and Additional fle 1: Fig. S7). Te over-representation
of old genes peaked in the early stages (e.g., E3.5
of mouse), whereas that of the mid-age genes peaked
during the late stages of organogenesis (E10.5–E12.5 for
mouse). In contrast, the under-representation of both
the two classes of young genes decreased. As an example,
the Chordata-Amniota grade genes of mouse decreased
in the early stages, and the Mammalia-Mus grade genes
decreased in the later stages. Tese results were consistent
with the ‘funnel-like’ model of the conservation
pattern of development [15, 16], which predicts conservation
at the earliest embryonic stage (see “Discussion”
section for details).
Both complex and young genes contribute to genome
complexity. To more comprehensively describe the regular
utilization pattern of genomic complexity factors, we
combined gene complexity and gene age degree to classify
genes. Taking mouse data as an example, all of the
old genes (grade I, Opisthokonta-specifc), regardless of
their degree of complexity, were over-represented across
the developmental stages (Additional fle  1: Fig. S8a, e,
i, m). Most of these old genes showed the greatest overrepresentation
in the early stages, except for the highcomplexity
genes, which were most over-represented in
the middle stage of organogenesis. Te Bilateria-specifc
(grade II) complex genes became increasingly overrepresented
from the beginning of the phylotypic stage
[15, 21] and peaked at E12.5–14.5 (Additional fle 1: Fig.
S8b, f, j, n), similar to the complex genes from all of the
PCGs (Fig.  3a, b, c, d). Tis implied that the trend of
the dynamic over-representation strength of all PCGs
occurred mainly due to Bilateria-specifc complex genes.
Te Chordata-specifc (grade III) complex genes were
under-represented in the early stages of development
(Additional fle 1: Fig. S8c, g, k, o), being the least abundant
from the beginning of the phylotypic stage, but they
became over-represented during the later stages. All
of the Mammalia-specifc (grade IV) genes, regardless
of their degree of complexity, were under-represented
across the developmental stages (Additional fle  1: Fig.
S8d, h, l, p). From these results, we inferred that gene age
degree was more powerful than gene complexity in determining
of the strength of over- or under-representation.
Te preceding analyses were based on developmental
data for the whole embryo. When the same analyses were
performed using the developmental data for four organs,
including the brain, liver, heart and lung of mouse, the
general trends were also observed during the development
of specifc organs (Additional fle  1: Fig. S9, Fig.
S10). However, only during brain development did we
observe the same trend of increasing over-representation
of complex genes (Additional fle 1: Fig. S9). Tis implied
the increasing brain complexity during development
from the moment of its formation is much more obvious
than the other organs investigated. Notably, in the liver,
the over-representation of complex genes reduced (Additional
fle 1: Fig. S9b, f, j, n), perhaps due to the emigration
of the hematopoietic system from the fetal liver in
the later stages of embryonic development. In addition,
the general utilization patterns of the complex and young
genes in certain adult OTCs were the same as those for
Fig. 3 Over- or under-representation strengths of each gene category classifed by gene length (a, c, e, g, i) or gene age grade (b, d, f, h, j) during
development of the fve species. Over- and under-representation are represented by −log(P) or log(P), respectively (see “Methods” for details). The
red/blue dashed line represents the ∓log(P) value corresponding to signifcant over- or under-representation. The gray shaded area represents the
presumptive phylotypic phase. PCG refers to ‘protein-coding gene’. Developmental stages are separated by dashed light green lines and marked
at the bottom of each panel. For M. musculus: Cleavage, Blastula (B), Neurula (N), Organogenesis and Fetus (F). For G. gallus: Primitive streak (P.S.),
Neurula, early Organogenesis (Organog.) and late Organogenesis (Organog.). For D. rerio Cleavage (C), Blastula (B), Gastrula (G), Segmentation
(Segment.), Pharyngula (Pharyn.) and Hatching (Hat.). For Drosophila melanogaster: Cleavage (C), Blastoderm+Gastrulation (B.G.), Germ band
elongation and retraction (Germ band.), Early of head involution (H), Diferentiation and Larvae. For C. elegans: 4-cell stage, E-cell division (E-div),
division of the AB lineage (ABdiv), Ventral Enclosure (VE), Comma Stage (CS), Movement (Mov) and First stage larva (L1). The abbreviations for gene
age grades: Op, Opisthokonta; Bi, Bilateria; Ch, Chordata; Ma, Mammalia; Eut, Euteleostomi; Ecd, Ecdysozoa; Dm, D. melanogaster; Cele, C. elegans
(See fgure on next page.)
Yang et al. EvoDevo (2018) 9:22 Page 8 of 19
Yang et al. EvoDevo (2018) 9:22 Page 9 of 19
the embryonic development data (see supplementary
results and fgure s11 in Additional fle 1 for details).
As for the utilization of complex and young miRNA
genes, we found that the gene age degree also was more
powerful than gene complexity in determining the
strength of over- or under-representation. Old miRNA
genes (grades I and II, Metazoa-specifc and Vertebrataspecifc)
were signifcantly over-represented in each state
(Additional fle  1: Fig. S12a, d), whereas young miRNA
genes (grades III, IV and V, i.e., Mammalia-specifc,
Rodentia-specifc and Mus-specifc, respectively) were
signifcantly under-represented in most of the states
examined (Additional fle 1: Fig. S12a, d). However, there
is not such a trend that complex miRNA genes (with
more target genes) are over-represented (Additional
fle  1: Fig. S12a, d) as the protein-coding genes (Fig.  3,
Additional fle  1: Fig. S11). Tis result implies that at a
certain state the miRNA genes with more target genes
are not utilized preferentially to form complexity and
they may function at diferent states.
Gene complexity, novelty and spatiotemporal specifcity
Te preceding result that young genes tend to be underrepresented
during development indicates that young
genes are not utilized preferentially in certain states. If
so, how do they contribute to the biological complexity at
the organism level? Te following developmental stagespecifcity
and OTC-specifcity analyses may answer this
question.
Complex genes tended to be expressed widely across
the stages of embryonic development (Fig. 4a, c, g, i, for
GL, and Additional fle 1: Fig. S13 for the other 3 complexity
factors), whereas simple genes tended to be
expressed in specifc stages. Tese results indicated that
complex genes contributed little to the diversity of proteomes
during diferent stages of development. However,
much more obvious diferences between young and old
genes could be observed. Te young genes tended to be
expressed in specifc stages (Fig. 4 b, d, f, h, i, for GOT_
Ens, Additional fle 1: Fig. S14 for the other 3 age grade
factors), indicating that the young genes contribute to the
diversity of proteomes in diferent stages of development.
Similar results were obtained from mouse adult organs,
tissues and cell types (OTCs) (Additional fle 1: Fig. S15),
indicating young genes contribute to the diversity of different
adult OTCs.
When gene complexity and gene age degree were combined,
we found that old genes were widely expressed
regardless of their complexity level (Additional fle 1: Fig.
S16). On the contrary, most of the young genes tend to
be expressed SOTC (stage, organ, tissue and cell type)-
specifcally when compared to all of the other classes
of genes (Additional fle 1: Fig. S16). Tese results indicated
that gene age degree has greater power than gene
complexity to determine the SOTC-specifcity, implying
young genes contribute more to the diversity of diferent
spatiotemporal states than simple genes.
For miRNA genes, it is also obvious that old miRNAs
tend to express widely, whereas young miRNA tend to
express at specifc OTCs (Additional fle  1: Fig. S17a,
d). However, there are no obvious diferences in SOTCspecifcity
among the miRNAs with diferent complexity
degrees (Additional fle 1: Fig. S17b, c, e, f). Tus, the
results from miRNA confrmed that gene age degree is
more powerful than gene complexity to determine the
SOTC-specifcity.
All these results indicated that young genes contribute
to the diversity of proteomes in diferent stages of development
and diferent adult OTCs.
Gene complexity and novelty contribute to organismal
complexity at two diferent levels
According to the preceding results, we inferred that complex
and young genes contribute to the organismal complexity
at two diferent levels. Complex genes are utilized
preferentially in certain states (certain developmental
stages or certain organs, tissues and cell types). Almost
in each proteome, the complex genes are signifcantly
over-represented, contributing to the complexity of each
proteome. In contrast, although young genes are underrepresented
in each individual state, they tend to have
a higher stage-specifcity, contributing to the diversity
between diferent proteomes,
Yang et al. EvoDevo (2018) 9:22 Page 10 of 19
Yang et al. EvoDevo (2018) 9:22 Page 11 of 19
Next, we focused on the detailed contribution patterns
of complex genes to the complexity of individual
proteome in certain states, and how the young genes
contribute to the diversity of proteomes in diferent spatiotemporal
states.
According to the preceding results, the complex genes
tend to be expressed widely across diferent developmental
stages and adult OTCs. Tus, we inferred that
the complex genes tend to facilitate the formation of
the common complex structures and functions present
across diferent spatial and temporal states. To describe
these common complex structures and functions, we set
up two controls: widely expressed (WE) simple genes and
stage-specifc (SS) complex genes. We classifed all of the
PCGs based on gene complexity grades (5 grades for gene
length, CRMN and protein length; 4 grades for DNIR)
and 3 grades of gene expression width (Fig. 5a). Te gene
distribution pattern across these categories was consistent
with the results of the gene spatiotemporal specifcity
analyses (Fig.  4a-d); that is, complex genes tend to
be widely expressed across diferent stages during the
development of the fve species. Tis result is confrmed
by the over-representation analyses (Fig.  5b, Additional
fle 7 : Table S9).
For the biological function analysis, we focused on
four categories: complex widely expressed (WE) genes,
simple WE genes, complex stage-specifc (SS) genes
and simple SS genes. Te characteristics of the gene
functions of these four categories were explored based
on GO annotation and the hypergeometric distribution
model, using all of the genes with BP (biological
process) term annotations as the background. Te signifcantly
over-represented terms of biological processes
(BPs) were counted and compared across these
four categories. Te two WE categories were obviously
closer because they shared more over-represented
BP terms, whereas there were almost no shared terms
between the WE and SS categories (Fig. 5c). In detail,
the complex and simple widely expressed genes obviously
participate in diferent biological processes
(Fig.  5d). Te complex widely expressed genes tend
to take part in such biological processes as biological
regulation, catabolic processes, cellular component
organization, transcription, cellular localization, cell
cycle and cellular component biogenesis. Te complex
widely expressed genes contribute to biological complexity
in each individual state during these biological
processes. On the contrary, the simple widely expressed
genes tend to take part in translation, transport and the
generation of precursor metabolites and energy. Tese
results provided the functional characteristics of complex
and simple widely expressed genes, marking for
the frst time that widely expressed genes were classifed
according to their complexity level and their functional
characteristics were explored. Until now, only
the functional characteristics of widely expressed genes
had been known. Here, the specifc functional features
of complex widely expressed genes were deciphered
and compared with those of simple widely expressed
genes. Furthermore, the complex/simple stage-specifc
genes clearly have diferent functional characteristics
compared with the complex/simple WE genes. Notably,
the BP term over-/under-presentation patterns are
more similar among the three higher species, and there
is obvious diference between the higher species and
the two lower species in this study. For example, in D.
melanogaster, most of the BP terms in Fig. 5c are significantly
over-represented in the long genes, regardless of
their stage-specifcity. Tis suggests that the long genes
defned in this study (the top 20% in each species) may
have diferent function distributions.
For the analysis of mouse, the gene expression data
in the adult OTCs are also taken into the calculation of
expression width. Te results about the distribution of
widely expressed and stage- or OTC-specifc genes and
their function characteristics (Additional fle 1: Fig. S18)
were similar to the analysis based on only developmental
stage-specifcity data. Te signifcantly over-represented
gene knockout phenotype terms further confrmed the
preceding results (Supplementary results in Additional
fle  1 and Table  S10 in Additional fle 8). When exploring
the functional characteristics of complex widely
expressed genes using the pathway view, some interesting
clues were found. Tere are 14 signifcantly
Fig. 5 Detailed expression and functional characteristics of complex genes. a Shown are the detailed gene numbers of each category classifed
based on gene complexity grades (5 grades for gene length of the fve species) and 3 grades of gene expression width (WE, widely expressed;
SS, stage-specifc and Other). The gene numbers of key categories are shown in red. b The percentages of protein-coding genes (PCGs) of each
complexity grade in each age degree category were calculated and divided by the expected percentage. Heat map showing the fold enrichment
values obtained from this division. The expected percentage was the percentage of PCGs of each complexity grade in the genome of each species,
represented as ‘bg (%)’ in the right region of the panel. The symbols representing over-/under-representation strength are the same as those in
Fig. 2. c Venn diagrams of the signifcantly over-represented GO terms (biological processes, BPs) for the four categories of interest. d Functional
characteristics of the four categories of interest. The extent of over- and under-representation is shown by 14 grades (−7 to 7; see “Methods” for
details). The signifcantly over-represented BP terms of the two main classes for mouse, WE and SS, are separated by the solid green line. Other
dashed lines separate the signifcantly over-represented BP terms of sub-classes
(See fgure on next page.)
Yang et al. EvoDevo (2018) 9:22 Page 12 of 19
Yang et al. EvoDevo (2018) 9:22 Page 13 of 19
over-represented pathways in complex widely expressed
genes (Additional fle  9: Table  S11). Interestingly, the
high-complexity widely expressed genes tended to be
distributed in the middle nodes of the signaling pathways,
and they tended to participate in multiple pathways
(Additional fle 1: Fig. S18 d1–d9).
Fig. 6 Detailed expression and functional characteristics of young genes. a Shown are the detailed gene numbers of each category classifed based
on gene age grades (4 grades of GOT_Ens of the fve species) and 3 grades of gene expression width (WE, widely expressed; SS, stage-specifc and
Other). The gene numbers of key categories are shown in red. b The meaning of heat map is similar to that of Fig. 5b. The symbols representing
over-/under-representation strength are the same as those in Fig. 2. c Venn diagrams of the signifcantly over-represented GO terms (biological
processes, BPs) for the four categories of interest. d The distribution of stage-specifc (SS) genes and stage-specifc young genes among the
diferent developmental stages analyzed. The numbers of SS genes and the numbers of youngest SS genes are shown as histograms, referencing
the left axis in each sub-panel. The percentages of SS genes in the expressed genes in each stage are shown as line charts, referencing the right axis
in each sub-panel
Yang et al. EvoDevo (2018) 9:22 Page 14 of 19
To explore the functional characteristics of stage-specifc
young genes compared with widely expressed young
genes and stage-specifc old genes, once again all of the
PCGs were classifed based on gene age grades and 3
grades of gene expression width (Fig. 6a). Te gene numbers
in these categories were consistent with the result
of gene spatiotemporal specifcity analyses (Fig.  4e–h);
that is, young genes tend to be expressed specifcally
during the development. Tis result is confrmed by
the over-representation analyses (Fig.  6b, Additional
fle  7  :  Table  S9). Te GO annotation focused on these
four categories: old widely expressed genes, young widely
expressed genes, old stage-specifc genes and young
stage-specifc genes. Te two ‘old’ categories (GOT: I)
were obviously closer because they shared common overrepresented
BP terms (Fig. 6c). Te similar results were
obtained based on the analysis of SOTC-specifcity of
mouse (Additional fle 1: Fig. S19). Specifcally, the biological
functions of the SOTC-specifc novel genes were
mainly related to signal transduction, immune system
processes, sensory perception and multicellular organism
processes (Additional fle 1: Fig. S19c). Interestingly,
novel OTC-specifc genes were not expressed evenly
among diferent OTCs; instead, they tended to be concentrated
in the testes and OTCs of the nervous system
(Additional fle 1: Fig. S19d, e). Tis result indicated that
the young genes tend to contribute to the specifcity of
these special OTCs.
Another interesting phenomenon is about the expression
distribution of the stage-specifc genes during
embryonic and larval development (Fig.  6d). Tere are
much more stage-specifc genes expressed during the
very early and late stages in M. musculus, G. gallus and
D. rerio. However, this trend is not so obvious in D. melanogaster
and C. elegans. Instead, in the development of
these two species, there is only one much higher peak of
the stage-specifc gene number in the larval stage. Tis
indicates that the diference between early- and midstage
embryonic developments in Protostomia is not so
much obvious as Deuterostomia.
Discussion
A ‘two‑level’ model: new insights into genome complexity
realization
Since the accomplishment of genome sequencing for
several model organisms, the relationship between the
complexity of genome and organism has become a focus
of genome studies [41, 42]. However, as more contributing
factors to genome complexity have been presented,
the picture has grown increasingly complicated and
confused. Ours is the frst attempt to categorize all gene
properties into two groups (Fig.  1), i.e., the complexity
and age degree of genes/gene products. Tis classifcation
system ofers us a generalized and clear framework that
can incorporate most genome complexity factors. More
importantly, based on this general classifcation, we can
identify general trends in how the factors that contribute
to genome complexity are utilized under certain conditions
to form phenotypic complexity at the molecular
and organism levels.
One of the core conclusions of this study is that complex
genes are signifcantly over-represented in each
stage of embryonic development (Fig.  3) and each of
the adult OTCs (Additional fle  1: Fig. S11), indicating
that the complex genes tend to be utilized preferentially
in each spatiotemporal state. On the contrary, young
genes are usually signifcantly under-represented in each
state (Fig. 3 and Additional fle 1: Fig. S11) and tend to
be expressed at specifc states (Fig.  4, Additional fle  1:
Fig. S15–17). From this result, we can infer that complex
gene/gene products contribute to the complexity of individual
proteomes in certain states, whereas young gene/
gene products contribute to the diversity of proteomes in
diferent spatiotemporal states. Organism complexity is
determined at two levels: the diversity of the spatiotemporal
states constituting the organism and the complexity
of each spatiotemporal state. Tis study reveals the
respective contribution of complex and young genes to
these two levels.
New insights into the relationship between evolution
and development from the viewpoint of genome
complexity realization
Te fundamental issue in evolutionary developmental
(evo–devo) biology is how to formulate the relationships
between evolutionary and developmental processes [10,
15, 19, 21]. Our study takes a new look at this old question.
Genome complexity is the result of a long history
of evolution. On the other hand, it is through the developmental
process that genome complexity is represented
as organismal phenotypic complexity. Te main aim of
this study is to explore how the genomic complexitycontributing
factors, the ‘results’ of evolution, are utilized
during development to form the organismal complexity
at phenotypic level. Tis work may provide new insights
into the relationship between evolution and development
from the viewpoint of genome complexity realization.
First of all, complex genes tend to be utilized preferentially
at the late stages of embryonic development,
contributing to the increasing complexity of the embryo
during development (Fig. 3). More specifcally, this general
trend occurs mainly due to the complex genes of
medium age (Additional fle 1: Fig. S8). Meanwhile, our
results give new insights into the theory of evolution–
development connection [10, 15, 40]. Our fndings support
the funnel-like model through a new observation 
Yang et al. EvoDevo (2018) 9:22 Page 15 of 19
of an obvious correlation between the time point of the
change in over- and under-representation and the order
of gene age (Fig. 3b, d, f, h, j, Additional fle 1: Fig. S7).
More importantly, we found some explanations about
why there are diferent evo–devo relation models, for
example, the seemingly contradictory ‘hourglass’ model
and ‘funnel-like’ model. Tis ‘paradox’ may be due to
three aspects of causes. First, the ways used for the comparison
may afect the results. ‘Conservation’ has two
meanings: One is that the expression pattern is conserved
among diferent species. Another one is referring
to the evolutionary age of the expressed genes in a
certain developmental stage. In the two previous studies
that obtained the funnel-like model [15, 16], their conclusions
were based on the analyses of the trend of gene age
in the genes expressed during each stage of development.
Tey found that the age of genes expressed in early stage
tend to be old and gene duplication and birth were the
most rare compared with other stages (see Additional
fle  1: Table  S12 for the detailed description). Tey did
not compare the gene expression pattern between diferent
species. Second, the method used to utilize the gene
expression data may also be a cause leading to the diferent
models. Support for the funnel-like model is based
mostly on qualitative data (only considering if a given
gene is expressed or not, Additional fle 1: Table S12) [15,
16], whereas support for the hourglass model is based
mostly on quantitative data (considering the amount of
gene expression, Additional fle  1: Table  S12) [15, 18–
21]. Barbara Piasecka et  al. can obtain diferent models
using the same expression dataset if they calculated using
quantitative and qualitative manner, respectively. Our
work indicated that at the qualitative view, the old genes
tend to be over-represented with the strongest strength
at the early stages of embryonic development, supporting
the early conservation model (funnel-like model for
animal development). Tird, diferent samples (the scope
for the comparison analysis) will lead to diferent conclusions
about evo–devo relationship. For example, based
on the comparison of gene expression pattern between
C. elegans and A. nanus, a recent study [43] suggested a
more complicated, funnel-like pattern of developmental
constraints than previously recognized. Tey found that
the level of conservation is throughout morphogenesis
stage and the divergence level does not increase. Tis
may be due to the similar morphology between these
two species. Altogether, the ways for the comparison, the
methods for gene expression calculation and the species
scope of the comparison may all afect the evo–devo relationship
model observed in a given analysis. Te diferent
evo–devo relationship models are not really contradictory.
In the further analysis about this question, we will
try to decipher the biological signifcance behind the different
models obtained with diferent ways.
Conclusion
Tis study, for the frst time, introduces a ‘two-level’
model of the realization of genome complexity at phenotypic
level: Complex genes contribute to the complexity
of individual proteomes in certain states, whereas young
genes contribute to the diversity of proteomes in diferent
spatiotemporal states. Tis study also gets new insights
into the evo–devo relationship: An obvious correlation
between the time point of the change in over- and underrepresentation
and the order of gene age was observed,
which supports the funnel-like model from a new viewpoint.
We also found the probable causes for the diferent
‘evo–devo relation’ models.
Membrane-bound and membraneless organelles create intracellular compartments to achieve spatiotemporal control of biochemical reactions in the densely packed cellular space (Banani et al., 2017, Shin and Brangwynne, 2017, Kato and McKnight, 2018). Membraneless organelles—also called biomolecular condensates—can be liquid-like, gel-like, or solid (Brangwynne et al., 2009, Frey et al., 2006, Boke et al., 2016). They have diverse molecular compositions that endow them with distinct physical properties (Nott et al., 2015, Zhang et al., 2015, Nott et al., 2016, Su et al., 2016). By enabling inclusion or exclusion of reactants, membraneless organelles create specific environments that increase the efficiency of cellular processes, including signaling and the addition of post-translational modifications (Li et al., 2012, Su et al., 2016).
One type of membraneless organelles are RNA granules that contain mRNA transcripts packaged into ribonucleoprotein assemblies (Han et al., 2012). RNA granules described so far typically have sphere-like shapes and form through phase-transitions driven by scaffolding proteins with intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) (Han et al., 2012, Kato et al., 2012, Nott et al., 2015, Banani et al., 2017, Shin and Brangwynne, 2017, Kato and McKnight, 2018). However, in many cases, the biochemical reactions favored or disfavored by RNA granules are not known (Banani et al., 2017).
The perinuclear localized rough endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is the major site of protein synthesis of membrane proteins (Reid and Nicchitta, 2015). During translation, mRNAs and their encoded proteins come into proximity. This facilitates the formation of 3′ untranslated region (3′UTR)-mediated protein-protein interactions (Berkovits and Mayr, 2015, Chartron et al., 2016, Mayr, 2017). For example, in yeast, it was demonstrated that signal recognition particle (SRP) is recruited to ribosomes that translate membrane proteins even before the signal sequence had become exposed from the ribosome. SRP recruitment was accomplished by 3′UTRs of messages that encode plasma membrane proteins, but not by other 3′UTRs (Chartron et al., 2016).
In human cells, more than half of genes generate mRNA isoforms with alternative 3′UTRs (Lianoglou et al., 2013) that can potentially regulate alternative protein complex formation (Mayr, 2018). This was first demonstrated for CD47 membrane protein (Berkovits and Mayr, 2015). It was found that the effector protein SET only interacts with CD47 protein that was encoded by the long 3′UTR isoform (CD47-LU), but not with the protein that was encoded by the short 3′UTR isoform (CD47-SU), despite their identical amino acid sequences (Figure 1A). SET is a highly acidic protein with a multitude of functions that interacts with positively charged amino acids in the cytoplasmic domains of CD47-LU (Li et al., 1996, ten Klooster et al., 2007, Berkovits and Mayr, 2015). The 3′UTR-mediated binding of SET to CD47-LU is functionally relevant and results in several downstream consequences, including higher CD47 plasma membrane expression, thus, protecting cells better from phagocytosis by macrophages (Berkovits and Mayr, 2015).
Figure thumbnail gr1
Figure 1TIS11B Assemblies Have a Reticular Pattern and Are Intertwined with the ER
Show full caption
View Large Image Download Hi-res image Download (PPT)
These observations indicated that 3′UTRs contain genetic information that can be transmitted to proteins through the formation of 3′UTR-dependent protein-protein interactions and imply that the transfer of genetic information from DNA to proteins does not exclusively happen through the translation of mRNAs into the amino acid sequence of proteins (Crick, 1958, Mayr, 2017). However, the mechanism of information transfer from 3′UTRs to proteins is currently unclear.
Here, we set out to investigate how SET is transferred from the mRNA to the protein (Figure 1A). In the course of these studies, we discovered a membraneless organelle called TIS granule, which is formed through physiological assembly of the RNA-binding protein TIS11B. TIS granules form a large reticular meshwork that is intertwined with the ER. They enrich or exclude specific mRNAs and proteins, and they enable the translation of specific mRNAs at a subdomain of the ER defined by presence of the TIS granules. The association of TIS granules with the ER creates a subcellular compartment with special properties that is necessary and sufficient for SET transfer from mRNAs to proteins, and thus, for the 3′UTR-dependent interaction of SET, and likely other proteins, with membrane proteins.
Results
TIS11B Forms Reticular Assemblies that Are Intertwined with the ER
We previously showed that the long 3′UTR of CD47 (LU) is required to establish the protein-protein interaction between SET and CD47-LU, whereas the short CD47 3′UTR (SU) isoform is unable to do so (Figure 1A). The RNA-binding protein HuR is necessary for 3′UTR-mediated CD47 plasma membrane localization as it binds to LU and recruits SET. However, HuR is not sufficient as it is only partially able to mediate this process (Berkovits and Mayr, 2015). This led us to hypothesize that additional RNA-binding proteins cooperate with HuR in establishing the protein-protein interaction between SET and CD47-LU. As SET binding to CD47-LU protein occurs at the site of translation, we hypothesized that the unknown RNA-binding protein localizes to the ER surface.
We screened the subcellular localization of several RNA-binding proteins using immunostaining (Figure S1A). TIS11B (also called ZFP36L1) protein is encoded by the ZFP36L1 gene, which is widely expressed across human tissues and cell types (Figure S1B) (Lianoglou et al., 2013). In several mouse and human cell lines, we found that endogenous TIS11B protein forms peri-nuclear assemblies that are several μm large and cover a substantial portion of the ER (Figures 1B and S1C). To evaluate the relationship between TIS11B and the ER, we performed live cell imaging using a confocal microscope. In addition to soluble TIS11B in the cytoplasm, we observed that TIS11B assemblies form a meshwork that is intertwined with the ER (Figures 1C and S1D). This is in contrast to many previously described biomolecular condensates that are usually sphere-like (Figure S1D).
Figure thumbnail figs1
Figure S1TIS11B Is Widely Expressed and Forms Reticular Assemblies that Are Intertwined with the ER, Related to Figure 1
Show full caption
View Large Image Download Hi-res image Download (PPT)
Like endogenous TIS11B, overexpressed TIS11B forms assemblies that are associated with a portion of the peri-nuclear ER. However, in cells that highly express TIS11B, either through experimental overexpression or endogenously, it forms huge assemblies that cover almost all peri-nuclear ER areas (Figures S1C and S1D). Time lapse microscopy showed association of ER and TIS11B assemblies despite dynamic movement of the ER (Video S1). 3D-reconstruction of the images showed that TIS11B assemblies have tubule-like structures that look similar to the ER, but are more bulky (Figures 1D and S1E). TIS11B assemblies embrace ER tubules (Figure S1F) and the three-dimensional organization of TIS11B assemblies and the ER allows them to share a large amount of surface area. To assess if TIS11B assemblies are liquid-like or more solid, we performed fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP). The slow fluorescence recovery suggests a gel-like state of the TIS11B assemblies (Figure S1G).
Download .mp4 (3.63 MB) Help with .mp4 files
Video S1. TIS11B Granules Are Associated with the ER, Related to Figure 1
Confocal time lapse video of the TIS granule (red) and the ER (green) in HeLa cells after transfection of mCherry-TIS11B and of GFP-SEC61B to visualize the ER.

Membrane Protein-Encoding mRNAs that Contain Multiple AREs in Their 3′UTRs Are Enriched in TIS Granules
As TIS11B is an RNA-binding protein known to bind to AU-rich elements (AREs) (Stoecklin et al., 2002, Lykke-Andersen and Wagner, 2005, Hodson et al., 2010), we performed RNA-fluorescence in situ (FISH) on SU and LU mRNAs to investigate the relationship between CD47 mRNAs and TIS11B assemblies. LU mRNA contains 22 AREs with 19 of them located in the 3′UTR and is strongly enriched in the region of the TIS11B assemblies (Figures 2A, 2B, and S2A). Higher resolution RNA-FISH showed that LU mRNA localized to TIS11B assemblies as well as to their surface (Figure S2B). In contrast, SU mRNA, which contains four AREs with one of them located in the 3′UTR, does not preferentially co-localize with TIS11B and is mostly located at other regions of the ER (Figures 2A, 2C, S2A, and S2C). To quantify the extent of enrichment or exclusion of mRNAs with respect to TIS11B assemblies, we created line diagrams of the fluorescence intensities of the mRNAs and the TIS11B assemblies. The correlation coefficients of the fluorescence intensities confirm that SU mRNA is not significantly enriched in the TIS11B assemblies, whereas LU mRNA strongly co-localizes with TIS11B assemblies (Figures 2B–2D). As TIS11B assemblies enrich LU mRNA, we call them TIS granules, because they have the characteristics of RNA granules.
Figure thumbnail gr2
Figure 2TIS Granules Enrich Membrane Protein-Encoding mRNAs with AREs in a 3′UTR-Dependent Manner
Show full caption
View Large Image Download Hi-res image Download (PPT)
Figure thumbnail figs2
Figure S2AREs in mRNAs Are Necessary for mRNA Localization to TIS Granules, Related to Figure 2
Show full caption
View Large Image Download Hi-res image Download (PPT)
We then asked if other ARE-containing mRNAs that encode membrane proteins co-localize with TIS granules. We examined two additional messages (BCL2 and CD274, encoding PD-L1) that contain multiple AREs in their 3′UTRs (Figures 2A, S2A, and S2D). For both mRNAs, the presence of their respective 3′UTRs was necessary for their enrichment in TIS granules, as expression of the messages without 3′UTRs (−NU [no UTR], but with a polyadenylation signal) resulted in their exclusion from the TIS granule region (Figures 2D–2F). This showed that all three tested membrane protein-encoding mRNAs with several AREs in their 3′UTRs predominantly localize to TIS granules.
We next examined the localization of an mRNA lacking both features and used the TP53 mRNA that does not encode a membrane protein and does not contain any ARE in its 3′UTR. In the presence or absence of its corresponding 3′UTR, TP53 mRNA was excluded from the TIS granule region, but increased its co-localization when instead a 3′UTR containing several AREs was used (Figures 2D, S2A, S2D, and S2E). To further assess the importance of AREs for mRNA co-localization with TIS granules, we next examined ARE-containing mRNAs that do not encode membrane proteins. We tested three pairs of mRNAs containing 13, 7, and 5 AREs in their respective 3′UTRs and compared mRNA localization in the presence or absence of their 3′UTRs. In the presence of the respective 3′UTRs the mRNAs co-localized with TIS11B in a subset of cells, whereas absence of the 3′UTRs resulted in their exclusion (Figures 2D, S2A, S2D, and S2F–S2H).
Taken together, mRNAs that combine both features, namely the presence of multiple AREs in their 3′UTRs and the presence of at least one region that encodes a transmembrane domain, are enriched in TIS granules (Figure 2D), whereas in the absence of both features all tested mRNAs (6/6) are excluded from TIS granules. Moreover, the total number of AREs in the mRNA correlates with the extent of co-localization, especially when this number is multiplied by two upon presence of a transmembrane domain (Figures S2A and S2I). Other features within mRNAs, including the number of transmembrane domains, mRNA length, GC content, or ARE density showed weaker correlations with TIS granule colocalization (Figures S2A and S2J). Our data indicate that 3′UTR elements determine the localization of membrane protein-encoding mRNAs to a membraneless organelle, and thus, to a specific subcellular compartment. The 3′UTR-based subcellular mRNA sorting occurs in addition to the well-described 3′UTR function in mRNA localization to very specialized cellular sites such as dendrites or synapses in neuronal cells (Mori et al., 2000, Mayr, 2018).
TIS Granules Enrich Specific Proteins
After having established that specific mRNAs are enriched or excluded from TIS granules, we next investigated this feature for proteins. HuR is an RNA-binding protein known to bind to AREs (Fan and Steitz, 1998). HuR mostly localizes to the nucleus and is only lowly expressed in the cytoplasm. However, strikingly, cytoplasmic HuR was enriched in the TIS granule region (Figure 3A).
Figure thumbnail gr3
Figure 3TIS Granules Enrich Specific Proteins
Show full caption
View Large Image Download Hi-res image Download (PPT)
As translation of membrane proteins at the ER requires folding of the polypeptide chains, we next investigated the localization of chaperones with respect to TIS granules. HSPA8 (also called HSC70) is known as constitutively expressed cytosolic chaperone that assists the folding of the majority of nascent peptides, whereas NACA is a ribosome-associated chaperone (Hartl and Hayer-Hartl, 2002). We found only slight enrichment of NACA, but strong enrichment of HSPA8 in the TIS granule region (Figures 3B and S3A). The increased concentration of chaperones in the TIS11B-defined ER domain may enable more efficient folding of membrane proteins translated within this region. Enrichment of HuR, HSPA8, and NACA in the TIS granule region was consistently observed in all cells investigated, demonstrated by the correlation coefficients of the fluorescence intensities (Figure 3C). In summary, TIS11B generates reticular assemblies that are intertwined with the ER and that enrich specific mRNAs and proteins. We next investigated the function of the TIS granules and asked if they are involved in SET transfer from LU to CD47-LU.
Figure thumbnail figs3
Figure S3CD47-LU Protein Is Translated in the TIGER Domain, Related to Figures 3, 4, and 5
Show full caption
View Large Image Download Hi-res image Download (PPT)
TIS11B Is Necessary for 3′UTR-Dependent Interaction between SET and CD47-LU and for Subsequent Surface Localization of CD47-LU
As LU mRNA was enriched in the TIS granule region, we investigated if TIS11B was necessary for the formation of the 3′UTR-dependent interaction between SET and CD47-LU protein. Small hairpin RNA (shRNA)-mediated knockdown of either HuR or TIS11B abolished binding of endogenous SET to CD47-LU protein, as shown by co-immunoprecipitation (coIP) of GFP-CD47-LU, indicating that TIS11B is required for the 3′UTR-mediated binding of SET to CD47 (Figures 4A, S3B, and S3C). TIS11B is also necessary for the functional consequences of SET binding to CD47-LU as depletion of TIS11B reduced endogenous CD47 surface expression but did not affect overall CD47 protein expression (Figure 4B). The reduction was partial and was similar to the previously observed reductions after SET or HuR knockdown (Figures S3B–S3F). This was expected as CD47 localizes to the plasma membrane in a 3′UTR-dependent as well as 3′UTR-independent manner (Berkovits and Mayr, 2015). Taken together, we demonstrated that in addition to SET and HuR, expression of TIS11B is necessary for the 3′UTR-mediated increase in surface localization of CD47.
Figure thumbnail gr4
Figure 4TIS11B Is Required for 3′UTR-Mediated Cell Surface Localization of CD47 and Interaction of SET with CD47-LU
Show full caption
View Large Image Download Hi-res image Download (PPT)
As both RNA-binding proteins—HuR and TIS11B—are known to bind to AREs, and as AREs in the 3′UTRs of mRNAs were required for their enrichment in TIS granules, we next investigated if the presence of a repeated ARE is sufficient for 3′UTR-mediated SET binding and subsequent surface localization of CD47-LU. We used a short 3′UTR that contains six concatenated AREs that is naturally present in the 3′UTR of TNFα (Figure 4C). Both HuR and TIS11B bind to the TNFα ARE, but they do not bind to SU1, a size-matched 3′UTR fragment from the 3′ end of SU (Figure 4D). Strikingly, replacement of the long 3′UTR of CD47—that is over 4 kb long—with the ARE of TNFα in the context of the GFP-CD47 construct showed that the TNFα ARE was able to fully recapitulate 3′UTR-dependent surface localization of CD47 (Figure 4E). Furthermore, as was shown by coIP, the TNFα ARE mediated SET binding to GFP-CD47 in a similar manner as was accomplished by LU (Figure 4F). These data show that a short 3′UTR containing several AREs is sufficient for 3′UTR-mediated SET binding and the subsequent increase in CD47 surface localization. The function of this ARE is mediated by HuR and TIS11B, as other known ARE-binding proteins (Barreau et al., 2006), including KHSRP and FXR1, did not bind to the TNFα ARE in a specific manner and did not influence surface localization of endogenous CD47 (Figures 4D, S3C, and S3G–S3I).
Although the known function of TIS11B is the destabilization of specific mRNAs (Lykke-Andersen and Wagner, 2005), knockdown of TIS11B did not affect endogenous CD47 protein expression level (Figures 4B and 4G). It did also not affect protein expression of the other known factors involved in 3′UTR-mediated CD47 cell surface localization, including HuR and SET (Figure 4G). This suggested that TIS11B may create a special environment that enables SET transfer.
Overexpression of TIS11B, but Not Overexpression of SET, Increases 3′UTR-Mediated Surface Localization of CD47-LU
In most cases, the extent of protein interaction increases upon overexpression of the two interacting proteins. However, this is not the case upon overexpression of SET and CD47-LU. Instead, expression of TIS11B promotes the interaction of SET and CD47-LU as it increased 3′UTR-mediated cell surface localization by 2-fold (Figures 5A–5C). This supports the hypothesis that TIS11B generates a permissive environment for SET transfer. To gain insights into the relationship between TIS granules and SET, we used confocal microscopy to assess the localization of SET protein with respect to TIS granules.
Figure thumbnail gr5
Figure 5Model of TIS Granule-Mediated Protein-Protein Interactions
Show full caption
View Large Image Download Hi-res image Download (PPT)
In contrast to HuR and HSPA8 (Figure 3), SET showed a very different localization pattern. SET is uniformly expressed in the cytoplasm, but it was anti-correlated with TIS11B in the TIS granule region (Figure 5D). Although SET was not completely absent from the granule (note that the line graph for SET does not reach zero), SET expression was especially reduced in dense granules, showing that SET is relatively excluded from TIS granules (Figures 5D and 5E).
Taking all the data together, we propose the following model (Figure 5F). Membrane protein-encoding mRNAs (such as SU) are translated at the ER (Figure S2C). If membrane protein-encoding mRNAs contain multiple AREs in their 3′UTRs, as was the case for LU, CD274-UTR, and BCL2-LU, they will bind to TIS11B and localize to TIS granules. TIS11B assembly results in the acquisition of new properties, also called collective properties (Alberti, 2017), as TIS granules are able to enrich or exclude specific proteins. TIS granules are associated with a portion of the rough ER. We propose that functional interaction between the ER and TIS granules creates a new subcellular compartment that we call the TIGER (TIS granule-ER) domain. Our data suggest that specific mRNAs with several AREs in their 3′UTRs are translated in the TIGER domain (Figure S3J). Translation within this special environment enables the formation of specific protein-protein interactions, as shown for binding of SET to CD47-LU. Importantly, these protein-protein interactions cannot be established outside the TIGER domain.
It is currently unclear how the special environment created by the TIGER domain enables the interaction between SET and CD47-LU. As the TIS granules are intertwined with the ER, their three-dimensional organization seems to keep SET confined to the region between the TIS granules and the ER, which we call the inter-organelle space. This may increase the local concentration of SET at the ER surface and it may reduce the degrees of freedom of SET movement. Entrapment of SET at the ER surface could facilitate the formation of protein-protein interactions between SET and CD47, thus enabling SET-mediated downstream functions of CD47 protein.
TIS Granules Are Necessary and Sufficient for the Protein-Protein Interaction between SET and Membrane Proteins
We next set out to experimentally test the predictions of our model. The model postulates that the protein-protein interaction between SET and membrane proteins can only be established within the TIGER domain. If this is true, SET should bind also to CD47-SU, if CD47-SU is translated within the TIGER domain. In cells that highly express TIS11B, TIS granules cover the entire peri-nuclear ER (Figure S1D). In these cells, SU mRNA also localizes to TIS granules (Figure 6A), indicating that the entire rough ER is converted into the TIGER domain. Intriguingly, as shown by coIP, in these cells SET interacts with CD47-SU (Figure 6B). Moreover, SET binding to CD47-SU is functional as it increases surface localization of CD47-SU (Figure 6C). As overexpression of HuR was not sufficient for the interaction between SET and CD47-SU (Figure 6B), these findings demonstrate that the TIGER domain is necessary and sufficient to mediate the protein-protein interaction of SET with membrane proteins.
Figure thumbnail gr6
Figure 6The TIGER Domain Is Necessary and Sufficient for the Protein-Protein Interaction between SET and Membrane Proteins
Show full caption
View Large Image Download Hi-res image Download (PPT)
We next tested if SET interacts also with membrane proteins other than CD47. CD274 mRNA contains 14 AREs in its 3′UTR and encodes PD-L1 (Figure 2A). Only the 3′UTR-containing mRNA was enriched in the TIS granule region (Figures 2D and 2E), and SET only interacted with PD-L1 protein that was encoded by CD274-UTR mRNA and not by CD274-NU (Figure 6D), supporting the model that the protein-protein interaction only occurs in the TIGER domain. Presence of the 3′UTR led to a 4-fold increase in surface expression of PD-L1 (Figure 6E). As endogenous CD274 mRNA has a constitutive 3′UTR, our data suggest that the 3′UTR of CD274 optimizes surface localization of PD-L1 in a post-translational manner.
TIS11B Assembly Is Charge Pattern-Driven and Is Required for 3′UTR-Mediated Protein-Protein Interactions
Another prediction of the model is that TIS11B assembly is required for the formation of protein-protein interactions, as only assembled TIS11B has acquired the ability to enrich or exclude proteins in the TIS granule region. To test this prediction, we investigated the molecular features responsible for TIS11B assembly. Most biomolecular condensates described so far are formed by proteins that contain IDRs (Han et al., 2012, Kato et al., 2012, Nott et al., 2015, Banani et al., 2017, Shin and Brangwynne, 2017, Kato and McKnight, 2018). TIS11B contains a moderate IDR at its C terminus (Figure S4A) (Dosztányi et al., 2005). Deletion of the IDR increased nuclear localization of TIS11B to some extent, but did not affect TIS11B assembly (Figures 7A and 7B). Moreover, it had little influence on CD47-LU surface localization (Figure 7C).
Figure thumbnail figs4
Figure S4TIS Granule Formation Is Charge Pattern-Driven, Related to Figure 7
Show full caption
View Large Image Download Hi-res image Download (PPT)
Figure thumbnail gr7
Figure 7TIS11B Is the Scaffold of TIS Granules Whose Assembly Is Charge Pattern-Driven.
Show full caption
View Large Image Download Hi-res image Download (PPT)
We noticed that TIS11B has a very particular charge distribution. The net charge of the N-terminal half of the protein is highly positive, whereas the C-terminal half is highly negative (Figures 7A and S4B). Distortion of the charge pattern distribution through the introduction of point mutations (Figures 7A and S4C) in charge pattern mutant (CPM) 2 abolished TIS11B assembly (Figures 7B and S4D; Table S1) and prevented the increase in surface localization of CD47-LU accomplished by overexpression of TIS11B (Figure 7C). Mutation of non-charged amino acids, such as serines, had no effect on TIS11B assembly or surface localization of CD47-LU (CPM1 versus CPM4) (Figures S4C–S4F; Table S1). Importantly, restoration of the charge pattern through point mutations with opposite effects rescued both TIS11B assembly and 3′UTR-mediated CD47-LU surface localization (CPM3) (Figures 7A–7C, S4C, and S4D; Table S1). As all TIS11B CPMs had expression levels similar to wild-type TIS11B (Figure S4G), their effects on CD47-LU surface localization were not due to decreased expression.
TIS11B Is the Scaffold of TIS Granules
As the CPM2 mutant abrogated TIS11B assembly, it allowed us to examine if TIS11B is the protein responsible for TIS granule formation. To test if TIS11B acts as scaffold or client of TIS granules, we knocked down endogenous TIS11B (Figure S5A) and replaced it either with tagged wild-type TIS11B or tagged CPM2 TIS11B. We repeated the RNA-FISH for LU and CD274-UTR mRNAs and observed again strong enrichment with TIS granules formed by wild-type TIS11B, but complete loss of local mRNA enrichment in the case of mutant TIS11B (Figures 7D, 7E, and S5B). Similarly, we no longer observed enrichment of HuR, HSPA8, or NACA in the peri-nuclear region in the case of mutant TIS11B (Figures 7F, 7G, S5C, and S5D). This shows that TIS11B is the responsible protein for TIS granule formation, demonstrating that TIS11B is the scaffold of TIS granules.
Figure thumbnail figs5
Figure S5TIS11B Is the Scaffold of TIS Granules, Related to Figure 7
Show full caption
View Large Image Download Hi-res image Download (PPT)
Notably, the point mutations in CPM2 that abrogated TIS granule formation preserved RNA binding and the function of TIS11B with respect to mRNA destabilization as shown by its repressive effect on protein levels (Figures S4H–S4K). Taken together, these experiments demonstrated that TIS11B assembly is not caused by the presence of the IDR, but instead is charge pattern driven. Importantly, regulation of mRNA stability can be accomplished by soluble TIS11B (Figure S4I), but TIS11B assembly is required for the collective properties of the protein that endow it with the ability to regulate protein functions through mediating 3′UTR-dependent protein-protein interactions.
TIS11B Is Widely Expressed and TIS Granule Formation Is Conserved among Vertebrates
We next examined if TIS granule formation is conserved in other species. Amino acid sequence conservation of the RNA-binding domain was used by others to identify TIS11B homologs (Figure S6A) (Thompson et al., 1996). In contrast to the high sequence conservation of the RNA-binding domain, the sequence conservation outside of the RNA-binding domain decreases substantially in species other than vertebrates (Figure S6B). In parallel, the net charge pattern of TIS11B is only preserved within vertebrates (Figure S6C). We examined TIS granule formation of transfected mouse and zebrafish TIS11B and fly TIS11 in HeLa cells and observed TIS granule formation for all except Drosophila melanogaster TIS11 (dTIS11) (Figures S6D and S6E) (Twyffels et al., 2013). dTIS11 did also not form TIS granules in Drosophila S2 cells (Figure S6F). These results further support the requirement of the charge pattern distribution for TIS granule formation and show that TIS11B assembly is conserved among vertebrate species.
Figure thumbnail figs6
Figure S6TIS11B Sequence and Capacity for TIS11B Assembly Are Conserved across Vertebrates, Related to Figure 7
Show full caption
View Large Image Download Hi-res image Download (PPT)
The TIS Granule Region Has Different Biophysical and Biochemical Properties Than the Cytoplasm
We postulated that the movement of SET is restricted in the granule region. To test this prediction, we performed a fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) assay and compared the recovery of SET fluorescence in the TIS granule region with its recovery in the cytoplasm. Within the granule region, we observed significantly less recovery (Figure 7H), revealing reduced exchange of SET protein. Limited fluorescence recovery was also observed for HuR and HSPA8 in the TIS granule region compared with the cytoplasm (Figures S7A and S7B), indicating that the biophysical properties within the TIS granule region are different than in the cytoplasm.
Figure thumbnail figs7
Figure S7Retention of Proteins in the TIS Granule Region, Related to Figure 7
Show full caption
View Large Image Download Hi-res image Download (PPT)
In the future, it will be important to identify the features that enable formation of protein-protein interactions in the special environment created by the TIGER domain. We started to obtain experimental evidence for the special environment provided by the TIGER domain. It was described that over-permeabilization of fixed cells can lead to extraction of proteins (Schnell et al., 2012). Having this principle in mind, we performed a retention assay (Figure 7I). We fixed and permeabilized the cells for 1 hr, followed by comparison of the fluorescence intensity signals of SET in the cytoplasm and in the TIS granule region. This experiment revealed a striking difference of SET behavior in the cytoplasm compared with the TIS granule region. We observed the disappearance of cytoplasmic SET, but retention of SET in the granule region (Figure 7I). Similarly, HSPA8 and NACA were also retained (Figures S7C and S7D). These results indicate that the TIS granule region is biochemically different from the cytoplasm, supporting the idea that the environment of the TIGER domain is special.
Discussion
TIS Granules Form under Physiological Conditions and Create a Meshwork Intertwined with the ER
We identified a new type of RNA granule with several features that sets it apart from RNA granules described so far. The RNA-binding protein TIS11B assembles under physiological conditions to generate TIS granules. TIS11B assembly is independent of its IDR but depends on a particular charge pattern distribution of positive and negative net charges. TIS granules are gel-like and form a meshwork with a reticular pattern that is intertwined with the ER. TIS granules represent the first membraneless organelle that is associated with a membrane-bound organelle. These TIS granule features are different in so far described RNA granules, including stress granules or P bodies, which form transient, liquid-like spheres in the cytoplasm (Banani et al., 2017, Shin and Brangwynne, 2017, Kato and McKnight, 2018).
The RNA-binding protein TIS11B is known as ARE-binding protein that destabilizes specific mRNAs (Stoecklin et al., 2002, Lykke-Andersen and Wagner, 2005, Hodson et al., 2010). We found that TIS11B is present in various cell types in a soluble as well as assembled state (Figures 1B and S1C). Whereas soluble TIS11B is able to destabilize mRNAs, through assembly, TIS11B acquires new, collective properties including its ability to enrich or exclude specific proteins in the granule region. This indicates that assembled TIS11B forms a membraneless organelle.
TIS Granules Enable Transmission of 3′UTR-Encoded Genetic Information to Proteins
The three-dimensional organization of TIS granules and the ER enables their functional interaction that results in the formation of a new subcellular compartment that we call the TIGER domain. The TIGER domain defines a functional subdomain of the rough ER that enables the formation of specific and functionally relevant protein-protein interactions of newly translated membrane proteins. Specific proteins encoded by mRNAs with AREs in their 3′UTRs are translated within the TIGER domain. The TIGER domain provides a different biochemical and biophysical environment than the cytoplasm that allows the newly translated proteins to interact with 3′UTR-recruited factors, which is critical to turn them into functionally fully competent proteins. This implies that functional maturation of a subset of proteins is not completed after translation and protein folding. Instead, genetic information encoded in 3′UTRs can be transmitted to newly translated proteins through TIS granules, thus determining intrinsic or new protein features. Although we currently only know of SET as 3′UTR-recruited protein, it is likely that many other proteins can be transferred from 3′UTRs to newly made proteins in the TIGER domain.
Specific Protein-Protein Interactions Are Established in the TIGER Domain that Cannot Form outside of This Compartment
We demonstrated that translation of mRNAs within the TIGER domain is necessary and sufficient for the formation of protein-protein interactions between SET and membrane proteins and for the downstream consequences triggered by SET-binding (Figures 6A–6C). In physiological conditions, SU is mostly translated outside of the TIGER domain (Figures 2C and 2D). However, TIS11B overexpression with subsequent granule formation at all regions of the rough ER localizes TIS granules to the site of SU translation. This results in the interaction between SET and CD47-SU and confirms that the protein-protein interaction between SET and membrane proteins can only be established within the specialized compartment created by the TIGER domain. As the protein-protein interaction occurs at the site of translation, the data indicate that some protein-protein interactions can only be established in a peri-translational manner, meaning either co-translationally or immediately afterward (Natan et al., 2017). This means that formation of particular protein-protein interactions is spatially and temporarily restricted. As the protein-protein interaction between SET and CD47-LU is based on electrostatic interactions (Berkovits and Mayr, 2015), the spatiotemporal control increases the specificity of interaction. It is noteworthy that overexpression of both interaction partners was not sufficient for the formation of the protein-protein interaction between SET and CD47 (Figures 5A and 5C) (Berkovits and Mayr, 2015), thus further supporting the compartment model. This is in contrast to the formation of many known protein-protein interactions that are promoted by overexpression of the interaction partners.
3′UTRs Play Several Roles in This Process
The protein-protein interactions that are formed within the TIGER domain are 3′UTR-dependent. RNA-binding proteins play important roles in the information transfer from 3′UTRs to proteins: TIS11B binds to AREs in 3′UTRs and through TIS11B assembly creates a special environment at the site of translation. HuR also binds to AREs in 3′UTRs and recruits SET (Berkovits and Mayr, 2015), thus providing specificity of the protein-protein interaction.
Furthermore, 3′UTRs are responsible for the localization of mRNAs to this specific subcellular compartment. Our data revealed that using the 42 nucleotides long TNFα ARE as 3′UTR is sufficient to fully recapitulate the increased surface expression of CD47-LU mediated by the long CD47 3′UTR. This is an important finding as it was previously thought that 3′UTR length itself may be important for the protein recruitment function.
Our RNA-FISH data on 15 mRNAs showed that the presence of AREs is necessary for mRNA localization to TIS granules, but AREs were not sufficient for mRNA enrichment in TIS granules (Figure 2D). Although all enriched mRNAs encode membrane proteins, it is currently unclear if a transmembrane domain is the defining feature or if the mRNAs share additional motifs in their 3′UTRs that are responsible for their enrichment in TIS granules. According to bioinformatic analyses, in HeLa cells more than 1,000 mRNAs (∼11% of all expressed mRNAs) contain AREs and encode membrane proteins (see STAR Methods) (Bakheet et al., 2006, Huang et al., 2009, Lianoglou et al., 2013). Further experiments will be required to assess whether these mRNAs are potential TIS11B targets.
TIS11B Is Widely Expressed and TIS Granule Formation Is Conserved among Vertebrates
The mRNA encoding TIS11B is among the highest expressed mRNAs in various cell types. Particularly high expression was detected in B cells, breast tissue, and ovary, where it was found among the 100 highest expressed messages (Figure S1B) (Lianoglou et al., 2013). Importantly, its charge pattern distribution and capacity for assembly are conserved among vertebrate species (Figure S6), suggesting that TIS granule function is a fundamental feature of cells.
It Is Still Largely Unclear How the Biochemical and Biophysical Environment of the TIS Granule Region Promotes Specific Protein-Protein Interactions
We currently do not fully understand how the TIGER domain enables the formation of protein-protein interactions. There are several possibilities. SET is relatively excluded from TIS granules, but localizes to the inter-organelle space (Figure 5D). It is possible that this characteristic of TIS granules may result in a local concentration increase of 3′UTR-recruited SET at the ER membrane. However, we currently do not have direct evidence for this. Nevertheless, we have evidence that the biochemical and biophysical properties in the TIS granule region are different from the cytoplasm (Figures 7H and 7I). We observed slower exchange of SET and other enriched proteins compared to their cytoplasmic localization (Figures 7H, S7A, and S7B). Thus, slower movement of SET and a decrease in the degrees of freedom of SET may be contributors of increased binding of SET to membrane proteins within the TIGER domain (Good et al., 2011). In addition, the interplay of the TIS granule and the ER creates a new interface. It is possible, that the presence of this interface enhances SET binding to membrane proteins, as biochemical reactions behave differently on surfaces than in solution (Kim and Yethiraj, 2010, Chapanian et al., 2014). Finally, many reactions are promoted by a lipid membrane context (Lamson et al., 2006). As the TIGER domain is created by the cooperative action between the TIS granule and the ER membrane, the membrane context may promote granule functions and improve SET binding.
It has become clear in recent years that the intracellular space is highly organized (Banani et al., 2017). In addition to the compartmentalization through lipid-membrane bound organelles or non-membrane bound organelles, our data reveal that there are also subcellular compartments that are created through interaction of membraneless and membrane-bound organelles. The currently known function of this new subcellular compartment is the formation of protein-protein interactions that cannot be established outside of this compartment. However, we anticipate that TIS granules will play additional roles. Our data suggest that the biological consequences will be broad. In the case of PD-L1, encoded by an mRNA with a constitutive 3′UTR, 3′UTR-dependent binding of SET correlated with 4-fold higher cell surface expression. Therefore, 3′UTRs are able to make cellular processes, such as protein trafficking, more efficient. This saves energy as less transcription and less translation are required to achieve a certain surface expression level. In the case of alternative 3′UTRs, as we showed previously for CD47, 3′UTR-mediated protein-protein interactions can mediate multi-functionality of proteins without changing their amino acid sequence (Berkovits and Mayr, 2015). As 3′UTR sequence has significantly expanded during evolution of higher organisms (Mayr, 2017), transmission of genetic information from 3′UTRs to membrane proteins—that is mediated by the TIGER domain—may contribute to increased functional complexity of organisms.
STAR★Methods
Key Resources Table
REAGENT or RESOURCE	SOURCE	IDENTIFIER
Antibodies
Chicken anti-GFP	Abcam	Cat# ab13970, RRID:AB_300798
Mouse anti-α-TUBULIN	Sigma-Aldrich	Cat# T9026, RRID:AB_477593
Mouse anti-ACTIN	Sigma-Aldrich	Cat# A4700, RRID:AB_476730
Rabbit anti-HuR	Millipore	Cat# 07-1735, RRID:AB_1977173
Mouse anti-HuR	Santa Cruz Biotechnology	Cat# sc-5261, RRID:AB_627770
Rabbit anti-KHSRP	Sigma-Aldrich	Cat# SAB4200566, RRID:AB_2737444
Rabbit anti-FXR1	Sigma-Aldrich	Cat# HPA018246, RRID:AB_1849204
Mouse anti-HNRNPA1	Santa Cruz Biotechnology	Cat# sc-374526, RRID:AB_10991524
Rabbit anti-CD47	Abcam	Cat# ab108415, RRID:AB_10859754
Rabbit anti-SET	Abcam	Cat# ab181990, RRID:AB_2737445
Rabbit anti-ZFP36L1/2	Cell Signaling Technology	Cat# 2119, RRID:AB_659988
Rabbit anti-ZFP36L1	Proteintech	Cat# 12306-1-AP, RRID:AB_2737443
Mouse anti-mCherry	Abcam	Cat# ab125096, RRID:AB_11133266
Mouse anti-SYNCRIP	Sigma-Aldrich	Cat# R5653, RRID:AB_261964
Mouse anti-FUS	Sigma-Aldrich	Cat# SAB4200478, RRID:AB_2737446
Rabbit anti-FUBP3	Sigma-Aldrich	Cat# SAB1300583, RRID:AB_10611838
PerCP-Cy5.5 mouse anti-CD47	BD Biosciences	Cat# 561261, RRID:AB_10611734
Alexa Fluor 647 mouse anti-CD47	BD Biosciences	Cat# 561249, RRID:AB_10611568
Donkey anti-mouse IRDye 700	Rockland	Cat# 610-730-002, RRID:AB_1660934
Donkey anti-rabbit IRDye 680	LI-COR Biosciences	Cat# 926-68073, RRID:AB_10954442
Donkey anti-rabbit IRDye 800	LI-COR Biosciences	Cat# 926-32213, RRID:AB_621848
Donkey anti-mouse IRDye 800	LI-COR Biosciences	Cat# 926-32212, RRID:AB_621847
Rabbit anti-chicken IRDye 800	Rockland	Cat# 603-432-002, RRID:AB_1660856
Goat anti-chicken secondary antibody, Alexa Fluor 633	Thermo Fisher Scientific	Cat# A-21103, RRID:AB_2535756
Goat anti-Rabbit IgG secondary antibody, Alexa Fluor 594	Thermo Fisher Scientific	Cat# A-11037, RRID:AB_2534095
Goat anti-Mouse IgG secondary antibody, Alexa Fluor 568	Thermo Fisher Scientific	Cat# A-11004, RRID:AB_2534072
Chemicals, Peptides, and Recombinant Proteins
GFP-Trap_A beads	Chromotek	Cat# gta-100
Stellaris FISH Probes, eGFP with Quasar 670 Dye	Biosearchtech	Cat# VSMF-1015-5
Streptavidin C1 beads	Invitrogen	Cat# 65002
Lipofectamine 2000	Invitrogen	Cat# 11668019
FuGENE HD	Promega	Cat# E231A
Odyssey blocking buffer (PBS)	LI-COR Biosciences	Cat# 927-40000
Halt Protease Inhibitor Cocktail	Thermo Fisher Scientific	Cat# 78439
SeeBlue Plus2 Pre-Stained Standard	Thermo Fisher Scientific	Cat# LC5925
NuPAGE MES SDS running buffer 20x	Invitrogen	Cat# NP0002
NuPAGE Novex 4%-12% Bis-Tris Protein Gels, 1.0 mm, 10 well	Invitrogen	Cat# NP0321
NuPAGE 4%-12% Bis-Tris Protein Gels, 1.0 mm, 12-well	Invitrogen	Cat# NP0322
NuPAGE 4%-12% Bis-Tris Protein Gels, 1.5 mm, 15-well	Invitrogen	Cat# NP0336
NuPAGE Transfer Buffer	Invitrogen	Cat# NP00061
Sample Buffer, Laemmli 2 × Concentrate	Sigma-Aldrich	Cat# S3401
Tween-20	Fisher scientific	Cat# BP337-500
Triton X-100	Fisher scientific	Cat# BP151-100
CHAPS hydrate	Sigma-Aldrich	Cat# C3023
Nonidet P-40	Sigma-Aldrich	Cat# 74385
Ampicillin Sodium Salt	Fisher scientific	Cat# BP176025
Bovine Serum Albumin (BSA)	Fisher scientific	Cat# BP1605100
Tris Base	Fisher scientific	Cat# BP152-1
Sodium Chloride	Fisher scientific	Cat# S271-3
Dextran Sulfate Sodium Salt	Spectrum Chemical	Cat# DE131
Ribonucleoside Vanadyl Complex	NEB	Cat# S1402
Salmon testes single stranded DNA	Sigma-Aldrich	Cat# D7656
Formamide	Sigma-Aldrich	Cat# F7503
TRI Reagent Solution	Invitrogen	Cat# AM9738
SuperScript III Reverse Transcriptase	Invitrogen	Cat# 18080044
Q5 High-Fidelity DNA Polymerase	NEB	Cat# M0491L
T4 DNA Ligase	NEB	Cat# M0202L
UltraPure agarose	Invitrogen	Cat# 16500500
16% Paraformaldehde Aqueous Solution	Fisher scientific	Cat# 50-980-487
ProLong Gold Antifade Mountant	Invitrogen	Cat# P36934
Methanol	Fisher scientific	Cat# A412-4
Ethanol	Fisher scientific	Cat# BP28184
Isopropanol	Fisher scientific	Cat# BP26184
Chloroform	Fisher scientific	Cat# C607-4
Critical Commercial Assays
QuikChange Lightning Multi Site-Directed Mutagenesis Kit	Agilent Technologies	Cat# 210513
QIAGEN Plasmid Plus Midi Kit	QIAGEN	Cat# 12945
Experimental Models: Cell Lines
HeLa	Jonathan S. Weissman	N/A
HEK293T	ATCC	ATCC Cat# CRL-3216, RRID:CVCL_0063
CAOV-3	ATCC	ATCC Cat# HTB-75, RRID:CVCL_0201
U2OS	Thijn Brummelkamp	N/A
MCF7	ATCC	ATCC Cat# CRL-12584, RRID:CVCL_0031
NIH 3T3	ATCC	ATCC Cat# CRL-6442, RRID:CVCL_0594
S2R+	Jennifer Zallen	N/A
Oligonucleotides
shRNA1 Control (Luciferase) 5′-GATCTCCCCCGCCTGAAGTCTC
TGATTTCAAGAGAATCAGAGACTTCAGGCGGGTTTTTC-3′	This paper	N/A
shRNA1 HUR 5′-GATCTCCGATCAGACTACAGGTTTG
TTTCAAGAGAACAAACCTGTAGTCTGATCTTTTTC-3′	This paper	N/A
shRNA1 KHSRP 5′-GATCTCCGAGGAGGTGAACAAATTAA
TTCAAGAGATTAATTTGTTCACCTCCTCTTTTTC-3′	This paper	N/A
Oligonucleotides for artifical 3′UTRs, SU1 5′-AUUGU
UAGUUAAGUUUUUAUUCAAAGCAGCUGUAAUUUAGUU-3′	This paper	N/A
Oligonucleotides for artifical 3′UTRs, TNFα ARE 5′-CACUU
GUGAUUAUUUAUUAUUUAUUUAUUAUUUAUUUAUUUA-3′	This paper	N/A
Oligonucleotides for PCR	This paper	Table S2
Recombinant DNA
pLKO.1-shRNA2 Control (scramble)	Sarbassov et al., 2005	Addgene, Cat# 1864
pLKO.1-shRNA2 HuR	Sigma-Aldrich	TRCN0000276129
pLKO.1-shRNA1 TIS11B	Sigma-Aldrich	TRCN0000329702
pLKO.1-shRNA1 FXR1	Sigma-Aldrich	TRCN0000160812
pLKO.1-shRNA1 SET	Sigma-Aldrich	TRCN0000063717
pSUPERretropuro-shRNA1 Control (Luciferase)	This paper	N/A
pSUPERretropuro-shRNA1 HuR	This paper	N/A
pSUPERretropuro-shRNA1 KHSRP	This paper	N/A
pcDNA-SP-GFP-CD47-SU	Berkovits and Mayr, 2015	N/A
pcDNA-SP-GFP-CD47-LU	Berkovits and Mayr, 2015	N/A
pcDNA-SP-GFP-CD47-TNFα ARE	This paper	N/A
pcDNA-GFP-SEC61B	This paper	N/A
TagBFP-SEC61B	Zurek et al., 2011	Addgene, Cat# 49154
pcDNA-BFP-SEC61B	This paper	N/A
pcDNA-mCherry-SEC61B	This paper	N/A
pMT-Bip-GFP:V5:KDEL	Okajima et al., 2005	Addgene, Cat# 69917
pcDNA-GFP-TIS11B	This paper	N/A
pcDNA-mCherry-TIS11B	This paper	N/A
pcDNA-mCherry-TIS11B shRNA resistant	This paper	N/A
pcDNA-BFP-TIS11B	This paper	N/A
pcDNA-BFP-TIS11B shRNA resistant	This paper	N/A
pcDNA-mCherry-TIS11B ΔIDR	This paper	N/A
pcDNA-mCherry-TIS11B CPM1	This paper	N/A
pcDNA-mCherry-TIS11B CPM2	This paper	N/A
pcDNA-mCherry-TIS11B CPM2 shRNA resistant	This paper	N/A
pcDNA-BFP-TIS11B CPM2	This paper	N/A
pcDNA-BFP-TIS11B CPM2 shRNA resistant	This paper	N/A
pcDNA-mCherry-TIS11B CPM3	This paper	N/A
pcDNA-mCherry-TIS11B CPM4	This paper	N/A
pcDNA-mCherry-TIS11B RBDM	This paper	N/A
pcDNA-mCherry-Tis11b mouse	This paper	N/A
pcDNA-mCherry-Tis11b zebrafish	This paper	N/A
pcDNA-mCherry-TIS11 fly	This paper	N/A
pMT-mCherry-dTis11	Véronique Kruys	N/A
pcDNA-GFP-SET isoform c	This paper	N/A
pcDNA-mCherry-SET isoform c	This paper	N/A
pcDNA-SP-GFP-CD274-NU	This paper	N/A
pcDNA-SP-GFP-CD274-UTR	This paper	N/A
pcDNA-GFP-BCL2-NU	This paper	N/A
pcDNA-GFP-BCL2-LU	This paper	N/A
pcDNA-GFP-ELAVL1-NU	This paper	N/A
pcDNA-GFP-ELAVL1-LU	This paper	N/A
pcDNA-mCherry-ELAVL1-NU	This paper	N/A
pcDNA-TP53-GFP-NU	This paper	N/A
pcDNA-TP53-GFP-UTR	This paper	N/A
pcDNA-TP53-GFP-TNFα ARE	This paper	N/A
pcDNA-GFP-FUS-NU	This paper	N/A
pcDNA-GFP-FUS-UTR	This paper	N/A
pcDNA-GFP-CCND1-NU	This paper	N/A
pcDNA-GFP-CCND1-UTR	This paper	N/A
pcDNA-GFP-HSPA8	This paper	N/A
pcDNA-mCherry-HSPA8	This paper	N/A
pcDNA-GFP-NACA	This paper	N/A
pcDNA-mCherry-NACA	This paper	N/A
Software and Algorithms
FIJI	NIH	https://fiji.sc/
Imaris	BitPlane	http://www.bitplane.com/imaris
ZEN	ZEISS	https://www.zeiss.com/microscopy/int/downloads/zen.html
GraphPad Prism 7	GraphPad Software	http://www.graphpad.com/scientific-software/prism
FlowJo_V10	FlowJo	https://www.flowjo.com
Odyssey	LI-COR Biosciences	https://www.licor.com/bio/products/imaging_systems/odyssey/
Open table in a new tab
Contact for Reagent and Resource Sharing
Further information and requests for resources and reagents may be directed to and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Christine Mayr (mayrc@mskcc.org).
Experimental Model and Subject Details
Cell lines
HEK293T (human immortalized embryonic kidney cells, female origin), MCF7 (human breast cancer, female origin), CAOV-3 (human ovarian cancer, female origin), and NIH 3T3 cells (mouse fibroblast cell line, male origin) were purchased from ATCC. HeLa, a human cervical cancer cell line (female origin), was a gift from the lab of Jonathan S. Weissman (UCSF), provided by Calvin H. Jan. The human osteosarcoma U2OS cell line (female origin) was a gift from Thijn Brummelkamp (Netherlands Cancer Institute). All cells were maintained at 37°C with 5% CO2 injection in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) containing 4,500 mg/L glucose, 10% heat inactivated fetal bovine serum, 100 U/ml penicillin and 100 μg/ml streptomycin. Drosophila S2R+ cells (male origin) were a gift from the lab of Jennifer Zallen (MSKCC), provided by Masako Tamada. Cells were maintained in Schneider’s Medium with 10% heat inactivated fetal bovine serum at 25°C. The cell lines have not been authenticated.

Budding yeasts (subphylum Saccharomycotina) are found in every biome and are as genetically diverse as plants or animals. To understand budding yeast evolution, we analyzed the genomes of 332 yeast species, including 220 newly sequenced ones, which represent nearly one-third of all known budding yeast diversity. Here, we establish a robust genus-level phylogeny comprising 12 major clades, infer the timescale of diversification from the Devonian period to the present, quantify horizontal gene transfer (HGT), and reconstruct the evolution of 45 metabolic traits and the metabolic toolkit of the budding yeast common ancestor (BYCA). We infer that BYCA was metabolically complex and chronicle the tempo and mode of genomic and phenotypic evolution across the subphylum, which is characterized by very low HGT levels and widespread losses of traits and the genes that control them. More generally, our results argue that reductive evolution is a major mode of evolutionary diversification.
Graphical Abstract
Figure thumbnail fx1
View Large Image Download Hi-res image Download (PPT)
Keywords
Ascomycota
Saccharomycotina
high-throughput sequencing
genomics
phylogenetics
phylogenomics
molecular dating
horizontal gene transfer
metabolic traits
and reductive evolution
Introduction
Yeasts—unicellular fungi that lack fruiting bodies—have evolved multiple times across fungi (Stajich et al., 2009), but most known yeast species belong to the subphylum Saccharomycotina (hereafter referred to as budding yeasts or simply yeasts). This diverse group, whose genetic diversity is on par with the plant and animal lineages (Figure 1), includes the baker’s yeast and premier eukaryotic model system Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Peter et al., 2018), the common human commensal and opportunistic pathogen Candida albicans, and over 1,000 other known species with more continuing to be discovered (Dujon and Louis, 2017, Hittinger et al., 2015, Kurtzman et al., 2011).
Figure thumbnail gr1
Figure 1Levels of Evolutionary Sequence Divergence within the Budding Yeast Subphylum Are on Par with Levels Observed in Animals and Plants
Show full caption
View Large Image Download Hi-res image Download (PPT)
Yeasts exhibit remarkably diverse heterotrophic metabolisms, which have allowed them to successfully partition nutrients and ecosystems to inhabit every continent and every major aquatic and terrestrial biome (Kurtzman et al., 2011, Opulente et al., 2018). Comparative genomic investigations have served as the launching pads into the evolution of budding yeast metabolism and ecological specialization in numerous clades, including the clade of S. cerevisiae and its close relatives (Hittinger, 2013), the genus Lachancea (Vakirlis et al., 2016), the C. albicans/Candida tropicalis clade (Butler et al., 2009), and the Candida glabrata/Nakaseomyces clade (Gabaldón et al., 2013). Although these investigations have shaped our understanding of budding yeast evolution, they have either focused on small slices of biodiversity or have been very broad investigations using collections of taxa skewed toward biomedically or industrially relevant yeasts (Gabaldón et al., 2013, Génolevures Consortium et al., 2009, Riley et al., 2016).
This sparse and sporadic sampling of genome sequences has forestalled efforts to examine the impact of different evolutionary processes or to identify major evolutionary trends across the entire subphylum. For example, several illustrative studies have shown how the presence of specific genes and pathways correlates with phenotypes, including clear cases of gains (Gonçalves et al., 2018, Hall and Dietrich, 2007) and losses (Hittinger et al., 2004, Riley et al., 2016, Slot and Rokas, 2010, Wolfe et al., 2015), but the frequency and generality of these observations remain unclear. Collectively, the use of a relatively small subset of distantly related budding yeast genomes has prevented the state-of-the-art quantification and statistical analyses that would be required to understand the tempo and mode of genomic and metabolic evolution across the subphylum.
To address this gap, we sequenced the genomes of 220 budding yeast species and coupled them with the published genomes of an additional 112 species to investigate the evolution of biodiversity of the subphylum Saccharomycotina. By interrogating genomic and metabolic trait variation, we reconstructed a robust genome-wide phylogeny, established the geological timeline of budding yeast diversification, quantified horizontal gene transfer (HGT) in budding yeast genomes, and inferred the evolution of 45 metabolic traits and their underlying genetic toolkit from the ∼400 million-year-old budding yeast common ancestor (BYCA) to the present.
Results and Discussion
332 Yeast Genomes Spanning the Diversity of the Yeast Subphylum
We sampled the genomes of 332 budding yeast species representing 79/92 genera across the subphylum Saccharomycotina (STAR Methods). Of the 332 yeast genomes, 112 were publicly available and previously published, 24 sequenced by RIKEN were publicly available (http://www.jcm.riken.jp/cgi-bin/nbrp/nbrp_list.cgi) but are described here for the first time, and 196 were newly sequenced by the Y1000+ Project (http://www.y1000plus.org) (Figures 2 and S1; Table S1). 195/196 newly sequenced Y1000+ Project genomes were from type strains (the other was from an authentic strain), as were at least 81/136 publicly available ones; in addition, 72/79 included genera were represented by their type species (Table S1).
Figure thumbnail gr2
Figure 2Time-Calibrated Phylogeny of the Budding Yeast Subphylum
Show full caption
View Large Image Download Hi-res image Download (PPT)
Figure thumbnail figs1
Figure S1Distribution of 332 Budding Yeast Species with Sequenced Genomes across the 12 Major Clades of the Subphylum Saccharomycotina, Related to Figure 2
Show full caption
View Large Image Download Hi-res image Download (PPT)
Compared to the 136 publicly available genomes, the 196 newly sequenced genomes (Y1000+ Project genomes) had generally smaller average N50 values (new = 417.2 kb vs. public = 1,235.4 kb), but they had comparable degrees of genome assembly completeness (new = 91.3% vs. public = 94.0%), GC contents (new = 40.3% vs. public = 41.1%), and average numbers of predicted genes (new = 5,822.4 genes vs. public = 5,525.7 genes), suggesting that they are suitable for most evolutionary genomic analyses.
A Robust Phylogeny for the Subphylum Saccharomycotina
To infer the budding yeast phylogeny, we assembled 2 full data matrices (2408OG data matrix and 1292BUSCO data matrix) and 7 additional ones (by subsampling subsets of genes in the 2408OG data matrix) and analyzed them using three phylogenetic strategies (concatenation under a single partition, concatenation under gene-based partitioning, and coalescence). These analyses produced a strongly supported and largely concordant phylogeny (Figure 2); only 32/331 yeast internodes were not recovered by all 27 phylogenies, with most instances of incongruence being due to whether the data matrix was analyzed by concatenation or coalescence (Figure S2).
Figure thumbnail figs2
Figure S2The Degree of Topological Similarity among 27 Phylogenies Reconstructed from Analyses of 9 Different Data Matrices, Related to Figure 2
Show full caption
View Large Image Download Hi-res image Download (PPT)
Surprisingly, one of the resolved internodes concerned the placement of the CUG-Ser2 clade, which was equivocal in previous phylogenomic studies (Riley et al., 2016, Shen et al., 2016a, Shen et al., 2017). For example, the most recent phylogenomic analysis, in which the CUG-Ser2 clade was represented by a single taxon, showed that the clade’s placement was unduly influenced by inclusion of the DPM1 (in S. cerevisieae) gene (Shen et al., 2017). However, our sampling of three additional representative taxa from the CUG-Ser2 clade eliminated the gene’s disproportionate influence and resolved this clade’s placement in the budding yeast phylogeny (Figure S3).
Figure thumbnail figs3
Figure S3The Effect of Taxon Sampling on Gene-Wise Phylogenetic Signal for the CUG-Ser2 Clade Branch in Two Data Matrices (Left Panel: 2408OG Data Matrix; Right Panel: 1292BUSCO Data Matrix), Related to Figure 2
Show full caption
View Large Image Download Hi-res image Download (PPT)
The new phylogeny divides the subphylum into 12 major clades (Figure 2), at least 2 and up to 8 more than previously recognized (Dujon and Louis, 2017, Hittinger et al., 2015, Kurtzman and Boekhout, 2017, Kurtzman et al., 2011, Shen et al., 2016a). Several families are now well circumscribed (e.g., Pichiaceae), whereas other families are not reciprocally monophyletic (e.g., Dipodascaceae/Trichomonascaceae), leading us to consider them as major clades comprised of multiple known families. One major reorganization stems from the recognition that the split between the genus Sporopachydermia and other budding yeasts is very deep. Although previous authors had recognized affinities to the families Dipodascaceae and Trichomonascaceae, our analyses placed the genus Sporopachydermia on its own long branch with deep affinities to the family Alloascoideaceae in most analyses (Figure 2). A second major reorganization stems from the placement of a group of species that all translate the CUG codon as alanine (the CUG-Ala clade) (Krassowski et al., 2018, Riley et al., 2016) as a lineage that is separate from and sister to the Pichiaceae clade. In previous studies, some members of these two clades were placed together, while the taxonomic placements of taxa in the genera Nakazawaea, Pachysolen, and Peterozyma were still unclear (Kurtzman and Boekhout, 2017, Kurtzman et al., 2011). Our results suggest that the CUG-Ala clade represents a new, yet-to-be-described taxonomic family.
A Timescale for Budding Yeast Diversification
To estimate divergence times of the budding yeast subphylum, we employed Bayesian relaxed clock approach (Yang, 2007) with four generally accepted calibration points (STAR Methods) on the 2408OG data matrix. We estimate the origin of the subphylum between 317 and 523 (95% credibility interval; posterior mean date: 404) million years ago (mya); the origin of the CUG-Ser1 clade, which contains the major opportunistic pathogen C. albicans, between 178 and 248 (210) mya, the origin of the whole-genome duplication (WGD) clade between 82 and 105 (93) mya, and the divergence of S. cerevisiae and C. albicans from their sister species (Saccharomyces paradoxus and Candida dubliniensis) between 4.0 and 5.8 (4.9) mya and 5.0 and 14.0 (8.7) mya, respectively (Figure 2; Table S2).
HGT into Budding Yeasts
To identify the tempo and mode of HGT into the budding yeast gene lineage, we investigated all 1,538,912 genes that reside in the 8,792 contigs ≥ 100 kb using a robust and conservative phylogeny-based approach (STAR Methods). We found that 878 genes in 186 yeast genomes were likely acquired via 365 distinct HGT events from non-fungal (mostly bacterial) sources (Figures 3A and S4; Table S3). Gene ontology enrichment analysis of the 878 genes shows that most are associated with metabolism-related terms (Figure S5; Table S3). Furthermore, 616/878 genes (∼70%) were significantly supported with the approximately unbiased (AU) test (Shimodaira, 2002), a value quite similar to the percentage supported by AU tests among previously described HGT-acquired genes (15/21, or ∼71%; Table S3). Although precisely quantifying the fraction of HGT events is challenging, the approximately 0.04% (616/1,538,912) to 0.06% (878/1,538,912) of genes identified to have been putatively acquired via HGT suggests that the process is a very small contributor to overall yeast genome diversification.
Figure thumbnail gr3
Figure 3Very Few Budding Yeast Genes Were Acquired via HGT
Show full caption
View Large Image Download Hi-res image Download (PPT)
Figure thumbnail figs4
Figure S4Distribution of 365 HGT Events on the Budding Yeasts Phylogeny, Related to Figure 3 and Table S3
Show full caption
View Large Image Download Hi-res image Download (PPT)
Figure thumbnail figs5
Figure S5Gene Ontology Term Enrichment Analysis of the 878 HGT-Acquired Genes, Related to Figure 3 and Table S3
Show full caption
View Large Image Download Hi-res image Download (PPT)
From the 878 HGT-acquired genes, 333 were present in the genomes of the six representative species from the W/S clade (Figure 3A; Table S3). In contrast, the genomes of 57/103 species in the CUG group, whose genetic codes deviate from the universal one, did not contain any HGT-acquired genes (Figure 3A). The fraction of HGT-acquired genes was significantly higher in the 226 yeast genomes that use the universal genetic code than in the 103 CUG group genomes (0.071% of 1,054,747 genes vs. 0.025% of 484,165 genes; Fisher’s exact test; p value = 2.2 × 10−16; which remained significant even after exclusion of the W/S clade species at 0.041% of 1,027,319 genes vs. 0.025% of 484,165 genes; Fisher’s exact test; p value = 2.5 × 10−5), supporting the hypothesis that altered genetic codes serve as barriers to HGT (Richards et al., 2011, Woese, 2000).
Finally, our dense genome sampling also facilitated the identification of cases involving the independent acquisition of genes participating in the same metabolic pathway into the same yeast lineage, as well as the independent acquisition of the same gene in two distantly related yeast lineages (Figures 3B and 3C). Specifically, an ancestor of Wickerhamiella (Candida) versatilis and Wickerhamiella domercqiae, two highly osmotolerant species, acquired a choline oxidase associated with the production of the osmoprotectant betaine from choline; remarkably, that same ancestor appears to have also independently acquired a choline sulfatase involved in the conversion of choline-O-sulfate into choline (Figure 3B). W. versatilis and W. domercqiae also horizontally acquired a nitronate monooxygenase likely associated with resistance to propionate 3-nitronate (P3N; a plant and fungal toxin) from genus Pseudomonas bacteria (Figure 3C).
Evolution of Metabolic Traits across Budding Yeasts
To examine the evolution of budding yeast metabolism, we used Bayesian inference to estimate rates of gain and loss for a compilation of 45 discrete metabolic traits in 274/332 budding yeasts across the subphylum (Kurtzman et al., 2011, Opulente et al., 2018) (STAR Methods; Table S4). We found that 39/45 traits experienced higher rates of loss, whereas the remaining 6 experienced higher rates of gain (Table 1; Figure S6). These trends were statistically significant for 16/39 traits where the rate of loss was higher than the rate of gain and for 1/6 traits where the rate of gain was higher than the rate of loss (Table 1). As the metabolic trait data came from multiple sources and the strains tested sometimes differed from the strains sequenced, we also experimentally determined the growth on 13/45 metabolic traits and a control trait (glucose) (Table S4) for 328/332 strains of the budding yeast species whose genomes we analyzed. We found that the average consistency of the character states shared between the compilation of available metabolic trait data and our experimental measurements was 94% (Table S4), suggesting that our inferences are based on accurate data.
Table 1Rates of Trait Gain, Loss, and Posterior Probabilities of Ancestral States 0 and 1 of the BYCA for 45 Metabolic Traits
Trait	q01	q10	PP (0)	PP (1)
Glucose fermentation	1.16	0.37	0.96	0.04
Galactose fermentationa	0.31	1.48	0.87	0.13
Sucrose fermentation	0.40	2.00	0.98	0.02
Maltose fermentationa	0.34	3.17	0.56	0.44
Lactose fermentationa	0.17	78.03	0.50	0.50
Raffinose fermentationa	0.27	2.35	0.76	0.24
Trehalose fermentationa	0.38	1.55	0.00	1.00
Inulina	0.23	3.49	0.12	0.88
Sucrose	0.21	0.92	0.68	0.32
Raffinosea	0.23	2.13	0.00	1.00
Melibiosea	0.06	2.89	0.00	1.00
Galactose	0.49	0.31	0.01	0.99
Lactosea	0.18	2.74	0.04	0.96
Trehalose	0.62	0.83	0.28	0.72
Maltose	0.27	0.92	0.67	0.33
Melezitose	0.43	1.22	0.83	0.17
Methyl-α-D-glucoside	0.24	1.53	0.00	1.00
Soluble starcha	0.11	2.25	0.00	1.00
Cellobiose	0.24	0.75	0.17	0.83
Salicin	0.10	0.76	0.20	0.80
L-Sorbose	0.50	0.51	0.01	0.99
L-Rhamnosea	0.02	1.97	0.03	0.97
D-Xylose	0.12	0.38	0.00	1.00
L-Arabinosea	0.02	1.36	0.00	1.00
D-Arabinose	0.18	2.27	0.99	0.01
D-Ribose	0.17	0.96	0.99	0.01
Methanol	0.03	0.27	1.00	0.00
Ethanol	0.73	0.14	0.00	1.00
Glycerola	1.95	0.23	0.40	0.60
Erythritola	0.03	1.38	0.00	1.00
Ribitol	0.33	0.38	0.97	0.03
Galactitola	0.13	1.85	0.09	0.91
D-Mannitol	0.11	0.27	0.00	1.00
D-Glucitol	0.04	0.23	0.00	1.00
myo-Inositol	0.01	1.43	0.00	1.00
DL-Lactate	0.68	0.89	0.66	0.34
Succinate	0.35	0.20	0.00	1.00
Citrate	0.46	0.85	0.08	0.92
D-Gluconate	0.75	0.97	0.58	0.42
D-Glucosaminea	0.04	1.35	0.01	0.99
N-Acetyl-D-glucosamine	0.08	0.57	0.21	0.79
Hexadecane	0.17	0.89	0.91	0.09
Nitratea	0.01	2.12	0.02	0.98
Nitrite	0.16	1.18	0.95	0.05
2-Keto-D-gluconate	0.53	0.48	0.87	0.13
q01 (instantaneous transition rate of trait gain): the rate of change from state 0 (absent) to state 1 (present). q10 (instantaneous transition rate of trait loss): the rate of change from state 1 to state 0. PP (0) and PP (1) denote posterior probabilities of ancestral states 0 (absence) and 1 (presence) for the budding yeast common ancestor (BYCA). Every value in this table is derived from the largest peak of density of posterior distributions.
See also Figure S6 and Table S4.
a Traits in which rates q01 and q10 are significantly different (assessed by Bayes factors).
Open table in a new tab
Figure thumbnail figs6
Figure S6Posterior Distribution of Rates of Trait Gain and Loss for 45 Metabolic Traits across the Budding Yeast Phylogeny, Related to Table 1
Show full caption
View Large Image Download Hi-res image Download (PPT)
Metabolic trait reconstruction also allowed us to infer the ancestral state at each node in the budding yeast phylogeny (STAR Methods). For example, we inferred that BYCA was most likely a metabolically complex organism capable of assimilating 27/45 of the carbon- and nitrogen-containing compounds analyzed (average posterior probability of trait presence = 0.64; average posterior probability of trait absence = 0.36) (Figure 4A; Table 1). Using a stricter cutoff (posterior probability ≥ 0.9), we found 21 traits that were most likely present in BYCA (e.g., nitrate, xylose, and galactose assimilation), and 8 that were most likely absent (e.g., glucose fermentation and methanol, ribose, and hexadecane assimilation) (Table 1).
Figure thumbnail gr4
Figure 4Evolution of Metabolic Traits across the Budding Yeast Subphylum
Show full caption
View Large Image Download Hi-res image Download (PPT)
Although the genetic bases for many of these metabolic traits remain unknown, the genes involved in a handful of metabolic pathways are well characterized, allowing us to not only reconstruct characterized genetic pathways, but to also use the cooccurrence of traits and genes across the budding yeast phylogeny to identify novel connections and functions. To this end, we used a mutual information-based approach to analyze the phylogenetic distribution of functional annotations of genes in yeast species, together with the metabolic trait values of those species (STAR Methods). We then overlaid our gene-to-trait scores onto a network of trait-to-trait ecological associations among 784 budding yeast species (Opulente et al., 2018). These analyses recovered multiple positive gene-to-trait associations for gene-trait pairs established in model systems, such as genes encoding beta-galactosidases (e.g., LAC4) with growth on lactose, alcohol oxidases (e.g., MOX) with growth on methanol, and the GAL1, GAL7, and GAL10 genes with growth on galactose (Figure 4B; Table S5) (Riley et al., 2016). These examples validate the utility of this analytical approach for elucidating the genetic underpinnings of metabolic trait variation.
As expected from our analyses showing a strong trend toward metabolic trait loss (Table 1) and previous studies on the losses of iconic genetic pathways (Hittinger et al., 2004, Riley et al., 2016, Slot and Rokas, 2010, Wolfe et al., 2015), the distributions of many of the genes involved in these metabolic processes (e.g., the genes required to assimilate D-glucosamine and N-acetyl-D-glucosamine and the genes required for L-rhamnose assimilation) were consistent with widespread losses, which included both ancient losses deep within major clades and more recent losses differentiating closely related taxa.
Complex Interactions between Metabolic Pathways Affect Gene Retention
By analyzing these gene and trait networks, we also identified genes whose associations with specific metabolic traits has heretofore received only limited attention in select budding yeasts. For example, although the model yeast S. cerevisiae cannot assimilate nitrate or nitrite (Kurtzman et al., 2011), we found that the genomes of 50 budding yeasts that could assimilate either of these nitrogen sources were generally predicted to encode nitrate/nitrite transporters (YNTs, 39/50), nitrate reductases (YNRs, 40/50), and nitrite reductases (YNIs, 47/50) (Figures 4C and 5). These proteins are homologs of a pathway commonly deployed in filamentous fungi to import nitrate (YNTs), reduce nitrate into nitrite (YNRs), and reduce nitrite into ammonia (YNIs) for central metabolism (Slot and Hibbett, 2007), strongly suggesting that the same pathway is deployed across many budding yeasts (Pérez et al., 1997). As with most other metabolic traits (Figure 4), nitrate assimilation genes were frequently lost, both anciently (e.g., in the CUG-Ser1 clade) and more recently (e.g., in the genus Cyberlindnera).
Figure thumbnail gr5
Figure 5Interconnections and Interdependence of Nitrate Assimilation, Xanthine Assimilation, and the Molybdopterin Cofactor Biosynthesis Pathways across the Budding Yeast Subphylum
Show full caption
View Large Image Download Hi-res image Download (PPT)
Our network-based approach also enabled us to use the phylogenetic distribution of the nitrate assimilation pathway to identify additional metabolic genes, pathways, and traits that covaried but lacked obvious ecological connections. For example, we uncovered several significant associations with the gene encoding gephyrin (Figure 4C; Table S5), an enzyme involved in the biosynthesis of the molybdenum cofactor (Moco) used by the nitrate reductase enzyme (Schwarz and Mendel, 2006). When we examined secondary associations (genes associated with genes that are, in turn, associated with traits), we identified genes predicted to encode the full Moco biosynthesis pathway (Figures 4C, inset, and 5; Table S6).
Surprisingly, the phylogenetic distribution of various components of the Moco biosynthesis and nitrate assimilation pathways revealed that YNRs were never present in the absence of the Moco biosynthesis pathway, but the reverse was often the case (Figure 5). Furthermore, most of the organisms that harbored the Moco biosynthesis pathway but lacked the nitrate assimilation genes also contained the genes encoding xanthine dehydrogenases (XDHs) (Figure 5). In filamentous fungi, XDH is responsible for the assimilation of xanthine and hypoxanthine and requires a thiolated form of Moco, which is created during an additional processing step performed by a specialized Moco sulfurtransferase (MS) (Bittner et al., 2001). The phylogenetic distributions of the genes encoding XDHs and MSs were strongly correlated; of the 83 species with either gene, 78 (or 94%) were predicted to have both genes, illustrating how the underlying metabolic architecture of genetic pathways can lead to remarkable evolutionary linkages between traits that may seem unconnected at first.
Conclusions
Genome sequencing and analyses of 332 metabolically diverse species allowed us to infer that the last common ancestor of budding yeasts, BYCA, was metabolically complex, that very few genes were acquired via HGT, and that the observed metabolic diversity of extant budding yeasts was largely achieved through repeated, extensive losses of metabolic traits through reductions in their underlying genetic toolkit (Figure 6). Thus, the portrait of BYCA that emerges is similar to an archetypal member of its sister subphylum, Pezizomycotina, which contains iconic filamentous fungi, such as Aspergillus and Neurospora. These filamentous fungi have much larger genomes (∼30–80 Mb) and gene sets (∼10,000–∼13,000 genes, including metabolic genes). Consequently, they exhibit a broader appetite and consume a wide array of nitrogen and carbon sources by deploying many genes not present in S. cerevisiae (Wisecaver et al., 2014).
Figure thumbnail gr6
Figure 6Evolution of the Budding Yeast Subphylum Is Characterized by Lineage-Variable HGT and Widespread Losses of Genes and Traits
Show full caption
View Large Image Download Hi-res image Download (PPT)
How have budding yeasts survived and even thrived while undergoing this reductive evolution? Although the arc of budding yeast evolution bends strongly toward reduced genomes and metabolisms across history, among both extant and inferred ancestral yeasts, plenty of taxa have much broader metabolic capabilities than the mean (Figures 6 and S7). One attractive hypothesis, whose testing will require even denser taxon sampling, is that generalist lineages with less reduced genomes and more metabolic capabilities are more likely to produce new species and less likely to go extinct. Evolutionary dynamics favoring generalists over specialists could conceivably play out over geological time through some form of clade selection (Stanley, 1975, Williams, 1992), by drawing from the considerable genetic variation segregating within species (Hittinger et al., 2010, Peter et al., 2018), or both.
Figure thumbnail figs7
Figure S7Distribution of 45 Metabolic Traits on the Budding Yeast Phylogeny, Related to Figure 6
Show full caption
View Large Image Download Hi-res image Download (PPT)
The observed pattern of widespread metabolic trait and gene losses complements the well-established losses or reductions of several flagship eukaryotic genomic and molecular features in many budding yeasts, such as introns, the molecular machinery for RNA interference, and H3K9me2/3 heterochromatin (Dujon and Louis, 2017). Evolution by loss is well documented for parasitic and symbiotic lineages (Dujon et al., 2004, Katinka et al., 2001, Spanu et al., 2010, Vogel and Moran, 2013, Wolfe et al., 1992) and in the aftermath of the whole genome duplication events where most second copies are lost (Soltis et al., 2015, Wolfe et al., 2015). Nonetheless, the magnitude and pervasiveness of metabolic trait and gene loss across 400 million years of budding yeast evolution in organisms with widely divergent, free-living lifestyles provides unexpectedly broad support for the argument that reductive evolution is a major contributor to genome evolution (Albalat and Cañestro, 2016, Wolf and Koonin, 2013), in general, and not simply associated with specific lifestyles and genomic events.
STAR★Methods
Key Resources Table
REAGENT or RESOURCE	SOURCE	IDENTIFIER
Chemicals, Peptides, and Recombinant Proteins
Phenol:Chloroform:Isoamyl Alcohol	Sigma	Cat#P2069
Critical Commercial Assays
NEBNext Ultra DNA Library Prep	NEB	Cat#E7370L
TruSeq DNA PCR-free Library Preparation Kit	Illumina	Cat#20015963
Nextera Mate Pair Sample Preparation Kit	Illumina	Cat#FC-132-1001
Quant-iT PicoGreen ds DNA Assay Kit	Quant-iT	Cat#P11496
Deposited Data
De novo assemblies	DDBJ/ENA/GenBank	See Table S1
Genome annotations	This study	Figshare data repository: 10.6084/m9.figshare.5854692
Data matrices	This study	Figshare data repository: 10.6084/m9.figshare.5854692
Phylogenetic trees	This study	Figshare data repository: 10.6084/m9.figshare.5854692
Alignments and ML trees for horizontally acquired genes	This study	Figshare data repository: 10.6084/m9.figshare.5854692
Metabolic trait data	This study	Figshare data repository: 10.6084/m9.figshare.5854692
Trait ancestral character state reconstructions	This study	Figshare data repository: 10.6084/m9.figshare.5854692
Experimental Models: Organisms/Strains
343 sampled species	This study	See Table S1
Software and Algorithms
iWGS v1.1	Zhou et al., 2016	https://github.com/zhouxiaofan1983/iWGS/
Trimmomatic v0.33	Bolger et al., 2014	http://www.usadellab.org/cms/?page=trimmomatic
Lighter v1.1.1	Song et al., 2014	https://github.com/mourisl/Lighter/
KmerGenie v1.6982	Chikhi and Medvedev, 2014	http://kmergenie.bx.psu.edu/
ABYSS v1.5.2	Simpson et al., 2009	https://github.com/bcgsc/abyss
DISCOVAR r51885	Weisenfeld et al., 2014	https://software.broadinstitute.org/software/discovar/blog/
MASURCA v2.3.2	Zimin et al., 2013	https://github.com/alekseyzimin/masurca
SGA v0.10.13	Simpson and Durbin, 2012	https://github.com/jts/sga
SOAPdenovo2 v2.04	Luo et al., 2012	https://github.com/aquaskyline/SOAPdenovo2
SPADES v3.7.0	Bankevich et al., 2012	http://cab.spbu.ru/software/spades/
QUAST v4.4	Gurevich et al., 2013	https://github.com/ablab/quast
NextClip v0.8	Leggett et al., 2014	https://github.com/richardmleggett/nextclip/
ALLPATHS-LG v51828	Gnerre et al., 2011	ftp://ftp.broadinstitute.org/pub/crd/ALLPATHS/Release-LG/
BUSCO v2.0.1	Waterhouse et al., 2017	https://busco.ezlab.org/
OrthoDB Version 9	Zdobnov et al., 2017	https://busco.ezlab.org/
AUGUSTUS v 3.2.2	Stanke and Waack, 2003	http://bioinf.uni-greifswald.de/augustus/downloads/
MAKER v2.31.8	Holt and Yandell, 2011	http://www.yandell-lab.org/software/maker.html
GeneMark-ES v4.32	Ter-Hovhannisyan et al., 2008	http://exon.gatech.edu/GeneMark/gmes_instructions.html
SNAP v2013-11-29	Korf, 2004	http://korflab.ucdavis.edu/software.html
RepeatMasker v4.0.6	Institute for Systems Biology	http://www.repeatmasker.org
Cuffcompare v2.2.1	Trapnell et al., 2012	https://github.com/gpertea/CuffCompare
MAFFT v7.299	Katoh and Standley, 2013	https://mafft.cbrc.jp/alignment/software/
Pal2Nal v14	Suyama et al., 2006	http://www.bork.embl.de/pal2nal/#Download
paml v4.8	Yang, 2007	http://abacus.gene.ucl.ac.uk/software/paml.html
MCMCtree v. 4.9	Yang, 2007	http://abacus.gene.ucl.ac.uk/software/paml.html
OrthoMCL v2.0	Li et al., 2003	http://orthomcl.org/common/downloads/software/v2.0/
Phyutility v2.2.6	Smith and Dunn, 2008	https://github.com/blackrim/phyutility
FastTree v2.1.9	Price et al., 2010	http://www.microbesonline.org/fasttree/
PhyloTreePruner v1.0	Kocot et al., 2013	https://sourceforge.net/projects/phylotreepruner/
trimAl v1.4	Capella-Gutiérrez et al., 2009	http://trimal.cgenomics.org/
IQ-TREE v1.5.1	Nguyen et al., 2015	http://www.iqtree.org/
phylomeDB v4	Huerta-Cepas et al., 2014	ftp://phylomedb.org/phylomedb/phylomes/phylome_0005/
MARE v0.1.2	Zoological Research Museum Alexander Koenig	https://www.zfmk.de/de/forschung/forschungszentren-und-gruppen/mare
RAxML v8.2.3	Stamatakis, 2014	https://sco.h-its.org/exelixis/web/software/raxml/index.html
ExaML v3.0.17	Kozlov et al., 2015	https://sco.h-its.org/exelixis/web/software/examl/index.html
ASTRAL-II v4.10.2	Mirarab and Warnow, 2015	https://github.com/smirarab/ASTRAL
MEGA7	Kumar et al., 2016	https://www.megasoftware.net/
iTOL v3	Letunic and Bork, 2016	https://itol.embl.de/help.cgi#batch
BayesTraits v3	Pagel et al., 2004	http://www.evolution.rdg.ac.uk/BayesTraitsV3.0.1/BayesTraitsV3.0.1.html
R package igraph	Csárdi and Nepusz, 2006	https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/igraph/index.html
R package infotheo	Meyer, 2008	https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/infotheo/index.html
R package minet	Meyer et al., 2008	https://www.bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/minet.html
R package wgcna	Langfelder and Horvath, 2008	https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/WGCNA/index.html
R package topgo	Alexa and Rahnenfuhrer, 2016	https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/topGO.html
GhostKOALA	Kanehisa et al., 2016a	https://www.kegg.jp/ghostkoala/
ARACNE	Margolin et al., 2006	https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/data/experiment/html/aracne.networks.html
Open table in a new tab
Contact for Reagent and Resource Sharing
Further information and requests may be directed to and will be fulfilled by the corresponding authors Chris Todd Hittinger (cthittinger@wisc.edu) and Antonis Rokas (antonis.rokas@vanderbilt.edu).
Experimental Model and Subject Details
Taxon sampling
Detailed information about the strains and genomes of the 332 budding yeast species sampled and analyzed in this study can be found in Table S1. We did not include genomes associated with different strains from the same species or with known interspecies hybrids. Taxonomy, strain ID, and source information of 332 budding yeasts and the 11 outgroup taxa (9 representatives of the subphylum Pezizomycotina and 2 representatives of the subphylum Taphrinomycotina) used in this study are provided in Table S1. All sequenced strains have been publicly deposited in the NRRL, CBS, and/or JCM strain collections.
The percentage of newly sequenced 220 species (196 newly sequenced genomes from the Y1000+ Project and 24 publicly available but unpublished genomes from RIKEN) in each of the 12 major clades ranged from 41% to 100%, with an average of 78% (Figure S1). Specifically, these newly sequenced 220 species represent 63 different genera; 74 are representatives of 36 genera (e.g., Ambrosiozyma, Saturnispora, and Barnettozyma) whose genomes have not been previously sequenced; 111 are representatives of 25 genera (e.g., Ogataea, Kazachstania, Lipomyces, and Cyberlindnera) that previously had one or two publicly available genomes; and the remaining 35 are representatives of genera (e.g., Candida and Hanseniaspora) that already had 3 or more publicly available genomes. The sampled 332 budding yeasts use three different genetic codes: 229 follow the universal genetic code and decode the CUG codon as leucine (Figure 2; Table S1); 5 in the genera Nakazawaea, Pachysolen, and Peterozyma, decode CUG codon as alanine (CUG-Ala clade); 94 in the families Debaryomycetaceae, Metschnikowiaceae, and Cephaloascaceae encode CUG codon as serine (CUG-Ser1 clade); and 4 in the families Ascoideaceae and Saccharomycopsidaceae also decode CUG codon as serine (CUG-Ser2 clade).
Yeast growth
Most yeast strains were obtained from the USDA Agricultural Research Service (ARS) NRRL Culture Collection in Peoria, Illinois, USA. Strains from all yeast species were initially plated from freezer stock on yeast extract peptone dextrose (YPD) plates and grown for single colonies. For all carbon and nitrogen testing, we set up 5 replicates on separate days using different colonies for each yeast species. Yeast strains from each species were inoculated into YPD and grown for 48 hours at room temperature. After 48 hours of growth, we randomized and arrayed species into a 96-well deep well plate for storage and future use. Using the same cultures, we also inoculated species into a minimal-based starvation medium containing 0.1% glucose, 5g/L ammonium sulfate, and 1.7g/L Yeast Nitrogen Base (w/o amino acids, ammonium sulfate, or carbon) and grew them overnight. After 24 hours of growth, we transferred the yeast species into carbon or nitrogen treatment plates for phenotyping.
Method Details
Genome sequencing and assembly
For each of the 196 newly sequenced species from the Y1000+ Project (Table S1), genomic DNA (gDNA) was isolated using a modified phenol:chloroform extraction method that used a second round of phenol:chloroform to remove additional proteins, sonicated, and ligated to Illumina sequencing adaptors as previously described (Hittinger et al., 2010). The paired-end libraries were submitted for paired end sequencing (2 × 250 base pairs) on an Illumina HiSeq 2500 instrument.
Paired-end Illumina DNA sequence reads were used to generate whole genome assemblies using the meta-assembler pipeline iWGS v1.1 (Zhou et al., 2016). We first preprocessed the raw sequenced reads by trimming of adapters and low-quality bases with Trimmomatic v0.33 (Bolger et al., 2014) and Lighter v1.1.1 (Song et al., 2014). Next, we identified the optimal k-mer length for each genome’s assembly using KmerGenie v1.6982 (Chikhi and Medvedev, 2014). We then used the processed sequence reads as input into six different de novo assembly tools: ABYSS v1.5.2 (Simpson et al., 2009), DISCOVAR r51885 (Weisenfeld et al., 2014), MASURCA v2.3.2 (Zimin et al., 2013), SGA v0.10.13 (Simpson and Durbin, 2012), SOAPdenovo2 v2.04 (Luo et al., 2012), and SPADES v3.7.0 (Bankevich et al., 2012). The resulting genome assemblies were assessed for quality with QUAST v4.4 (Gurevich et al., 2013); as the “best” assembly for each genome we chose the one with the highest genome size and N50 value (i.e., the contig or scaffold value above which 50% of the total length of the sequence assembly can be found).
For the genomes of the 24 species sequenced by RIKEN (Table S1), a paired-end library with an approximate insert size of 240 bp was prepared from the genomic DNA using the TruSeq DNA PCR-free Library Preparation Kit (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocols. A mate-pair library with an approximate insert size of 3 kb was also prepared from DNA using the Nextera Mate Pair Sample Preparation Kit (Illumina) with some modifications. Both paired-end and mate-pair libraries were sequenced on a HiSeq 2500 (Illumina) to generate 151-base paired-end reads. Mate-pair libraries derived from the DNA of Hyphopichia homilentoma JCM 1507, Candida sorboxylosa JCM 1536, Candida intermedia JCM 1607, Wickerhamia fluorescens JCM 1821, Cyberlindnera fabianii JCM 3601, Saccharomycopsis malanga JCM 7620, Candida carpophila JCM 9396, Candida succiphila JCM 9445, Wickerhamiella domercqiae JCM 9478, Sporopachydermia quercuum JCM 9486, Starmerella bombicola JCM 9596, Candida boidinii JCM 9604, Nakazawaea peltata JCM 9829, Scheffersomyces lignosus JCM 9837, and Ambrosiozyma kashinagacola JCM 15019 were sequenced on a MiSeq (Illumina) to generate 309-base paired-end reads. All mate-pair reads were processed using NextClip software, v0.8 (Leggett et al., 2014) to trim the adaptor sequences. The estimated sequencing depths ranged from 76 × for Yarrowia deformans JCM 1694 to 281 × for Wickerhamiella versatilis JCM 5958. The ALLPATHS-LG software version 51828 (for Cyberlindnera fabianii JCM 3601, Wickerhamiella domercqiae JCM 9478, and Starmerella bombicola JCM 9596), version 52155 (for Hyphopichia homilentoma JCM 1507, Candida sorboxylosa JCM 1536, Candida intermedia JCM 1607, Priceomyces haplophilus JCM 1635, Yarrowia deformans JCM 1694, Wickerhamia fluorescens JCM 1821, Ambrosiozyma monospora JCM 7599, Saccharomycopsis malanga JCM 7620, Candida carpophila JCM 9396, Candida succiphila JCM 9445, Sporopachydermia quercuum JCM 9486, Candida boidinii JCM 9604, Nakazawaea peltata JCM 9829, Scheffersomyces lignosus JCM 9837, Yarrowia keelungensis JCM 14894, and Ambrosiozyma kashinagacola JCM 15019), and version 52488 (for Wickerhamiella versatilis JCM 5958, Ascoidea asiatica JCM 7603, Alloascoidea hylecoeti JCM 7604, Ogataea methanolica JCM 10240, and Millerozyma acaciae JCM 10732) were used to assemble the reads into scaffolds using the default parameters (Gnerre et al., 2011). Small contigs (< 1 kb) were not included in the final genome assemblies. The sequence library generation and sequencing were performed at the Genome Network Analysis Support Facility, RIKEN Center for Life Science Technologies (Yokohama, Japan).
Assessment of genome assemblies
The qualities of the genome assemblies of the 196 newly sequenced (Y1000+ Project genomes) and 136 publicly available (RIKEN plus previously published genomes) budding yeast species were assessed by quantifying their completeness based on the expected gene content of the Benchmarking Universal Single-Copy Orthologs (BUSCO), version 2.0.1 (Waterhouse et al., 2017), as described previously (Shen et al., 2016a). We used a set of 1,759 BUSCO genes inferred to be saccharomyceta-specific (“saccharomyceta” is an informal taxonomic rank used by many databases, including NCBI: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/Browser/wwwtax.cgi?mode=Info&id=716545) and single-copy in at least 90% of 60 genomes in the OrthoDB Version 9 database (Zdobnov et al., 2017) to evaluate the completeness of the 332 genome assemblies. Briefly, for each BUSCO gene, its consensus orthologous protein sequence among the 60 reference genomes was used as query in a tBLASTn search against each genome to identify up to three putative genomic regions, and the gene structure of each putative genomic region was predicted by AUGUSTUS v 3.2.2 (Stanke and Waack, 2003). Next, the sequences of these predicted genes were aligned to the HMM-profile of the BUSCO gene, and the ones with alignment bit-scores higher than a pre-set cutoff (90% of the lowest bit-score among the 60 reference genomes) were kept. If only one predicted gene from a genome was retained and its aligned sequence length in the HMM-profile alignment was ≥ 95% of the aligned sequence lengths of genes in the 60 reference genomes, the BUSCO gene was classified to be present in the genome examined as single-copy, “full-length.” If two or more predicted genes from a genome were retained and their aligned sequence lengths in the HMM-profile alignments were ≥ 95% of the aligned sequence lengths of genes in the 60 reference genomes, the BUSCO gene was classified as duplicated, “full-length.” If one or more predicted genes from a genome were retained but their aligned sequence lengths in the HMM-profile alignment were < 95% of the aligned sequence lengths of genes in the 60 reference genomes, the BUSCO gene was classified as “fragmented.” If no predicted gene from a genome was retained, the BUSCO gene was classified as “missing.” For each genome, we then calculated the fractions of single-copy (full-length) genes, duplicated (full-length) genes, fragmented genes, and missing genes, which in turn provided us with a measure of the completeness of gene content in each of the 332 genomes (Shen et al., 2016a).
Genome annotation
With the exception of Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Candida albicans, whose genome annotations are of exceptionally high quality, for consistency we annotated all the other 330 budding yeast genomes analyzed in our study using the MAKER genome annotation pipeline v2.31.8 (Holt and Yandell, 2011). Genome annotation using MAKER occurs in an iterative manner and relies on multiple inputs, some of which were universal to all genomes (e.g., homology evidence), whereas the others were species-specific (e.g., parameters for ab initio gene predictors). The procedure described below was followed for the annotation of all 330 genomes.
The homology evidence used in our genome annotation consists of fungal protein sequences in the SwissProt database (release 2016_11; ftp://ftp.uniprot.org/pub/databases/uniprot/previous_releases/release-2016_11/knowledgebase/uniprot_sprot-only2016_11.tar.gz) and annotated protein sequences of select yeast species from Mycocosm (Grigoriev et al., 2014), a web portal developed by the US Department of Energy Joint Genome Institute for fungal genomic analyses. Three ab initio gene predictors were used with the MAKER pipeline, including GeneMark-ES v4.32 (Ter-Hovhannisyan et al., 2008), SNAP v2013-11-29 (Korf, 2004), and AUGUSTUS v 3.2.2 (Stanke and Waack, 2003), each of which was trained for each individual genome. For GeneMark-ES, repeats in the genome sequence were first soft-masked using RepeatMasker v4.0.6 (http://www.repeatmasker.org) with the library Repbase library release-20160829 and the “-species” parameter set to “saccharomycotina” for all genomes. GeneMark-ES was then trained on the masked genome sequence using the self-training option (“–ES”) and the branch model algorithm (“–fugus”), which is optimal for fungal genome annotation. On the other hand, the training of both SNAP and AUGUSTUS requires pre-existing gene models as training data. Therefore, we carried out an initial MAKER analysis where gene annotations were generated directly from homology evidence (the “protein2genome” option in the “maker_opts.ctl” control file was set to 1) without using any ab initio gene predictors. The resulting gene annotations supported by homology evidence (“keep_preds” set to 0) were then used to train SNAP and AUGUSTUS.
Once all three ab initio gene predictors were trained, they were used together with homology evidence to conduct a first round of full MAKER analysis; it should be noted that, here, the homology evidence was only used to inform gene predictions (“protein2genome” set to 0). Resulting gene models supported by homology evidence (“keep_preds” set to 0) were used to re-train SNAP and AUGUSTUS. A second round of MAKER analysis was conducted using the newly trained SNAP and AUGUSTUS parameters, and once again the resulting gene models with homology supports were used to re-train SNAP and AUGUSTUS. Finally, a third round of MAKER analysis was performed using the new SNAP and AUGUSTUS parameters. All resulting gene models were reported (“keep_preds” set to 1), and these comprise the final set of annotations for the genome.
Thirty-nine out of the 136 published genomes analyzed in our study have previously been annotated. To evaluate the quality of our genome annotations, we performed direct comparisons between our annotations and existing ones for the same species. Genome annotations of 39 budding yeast species were downloaded from their respective sources and compared to the corresponding annotations generated in our study using Cuffcompare v2.2.1 (Trapnell et al., 2012). Using the existing annotations as the reference, our annotations achieved high levels of specificity (ranging from 92% to 99.2%, with an average of 97.3%) and sensitivity (ranging from 85.3% to 99.3%, with an average of 94.9%) at the base pair level, as well as contained few missing exons (the fraction of exons missing ranged from 2.7% to 15%, with an average of 4.8%) and genes (the fraction of genes missing ranged from 1.1% to 11.9%, with an average of 3.9%) across the 39 budding yeast species. Note that all of these calculations assume that the previously published annotations contain no errors, which might inflate estimates of inaccuracies in our annotations.
Identification of potential hybrid species
Although we excluded the genomes of known hybrid species from our study, the possibility exists that some of the 332 budding yeast genomes are the products of hybridization (Hittinger et al., 2015). To test whether this was the case, for each of the 332 budding yeast genomes, we examined the genome-wide distribution of Ks (number of synonymous substitutions per synonymous site) values determined from pairs of orthologous genes identified in the species of interest and its closest relative in the budding yeast phylogeny depicted in Figure 2 (following Ortiz-Merino et al. [2017]). To calculate the Ks distribution for a species of interest, for each gene in the species of interest we identified its closest homolog in the genome of their closest relative using BlastP with an e-value cut off of 10−10. The protein sequences of the gene pairs were then aligned using MAFFT, version 7.299 (Katoh and Standley, 2013), with options “–genafpair–maxiterate 1000.” DNA/codon alignments were then generated by threading the DNA sequence onto the protein alignment using Pal2Nal (Suyama et al., 2006). Using the DNA/codon alignments, Ks was calculated using the LWL85m method implemented in the yn00 module of paml4 (Yang, 2007).
In known hybrid species, such as Saccharomyces pastorianus and Zygosaccharomyces parabailii (Dunn and Sherlock, 2008, Ortiz-Merino et al., 2017), the genome-wide distribution of Ks values is bimodal, reflecting the fact that some genes in the hybrid genome are most closely related to one parental species and some to the other more divergent parent. In contrast, non-hybrid species have a unimodal Ks distribution, reflecting the fact that genes originated from a single parental species. We visually inspected the resulting Ks distributions and found that the newly sequenced genomes of Citeromyces siamensis and Martiniozyma abiesophila had bimodal distributions of Ks similar to those of S. pastorianus and Z. parabailii (Dunn and Sherlock, 2008, Ortiz-Merino et al., 2017), suggesting that Ci. siamensis and Ma. abiesophila are of potentially hybrid origin. Consistent with this hypothesis, Ci. siamensis and Ma. abiesophila also had the highest numbers of predicted genes (12,786 and 12,589, respectively), the highest numbers of gene duplicates (24.1% and 23.6%, respectively), and the highest genome sizes (24.8 Mb and 14.5 Mb, respectively) in our dataset (Table S1). Both hybrid taxa were not associated with any of the 32 incongruent internodes (Figure 2).
Phylogenomic data matrix construction
We generated two complete data matrices (2408OG data matrix and 1292BUSCO data matrix) from the genomes of 332 budding yeasts and 11 outgroups, as well as 7 additional data matrices by subsampling subsets of the orthologous groups of genes (OGs) in the 2408OG data matrix.
a) 2408OG data matrix
The 2408OG orthologous group data matrix was constructed based on a 5-step workflow.
In step 1, we used all protein sequences of the 2,012,541 genes present in the 332 budding yeasts and 11 outgroups to perform an all-versus-all search using BLASTP with an e-value cutoff of 10−10. We then used the BLASTP results to cluster homologous protein sequences using the Markov Cluster (MCL) algorithm implemented in OrthoMCL, version 2.0 (Li et al., 2003); we adopted the widely used inflation parameter of 1.5 for two reasons. First, this inflation parameter value was found to be the optimal one in a previous evaluation of the effects of different inflation parameter values on orthology assignment in the budding yeasts (Salichos and Rokas, 2011). Second, our examination of a range of different inflation parameter values (from 1.2 to 2.0, with a step of 0.1) showed that all values led to the generation of nearly sets of clusters of homologous genes. OrthoMCL clustering resulted in the identification of 171,715 singleton clusters that contain a single protein and 61,763 clusters that contain two or more proteins. Plotting of the distributions of the lengths of genomic contigs that contain the 171,715 singleton clusters and 61,763 clusters with two or more proteins showed that the two distributions were very similar. Retaining only those clusters with gene occupancy ≥ 50%, that is those clusters that were present in at least half (≥172) of the 343 genomes (332 budding yeasts and 11 outgroups), resulted in the identification of 4,036 putative OGs.
In step 2, we inspected these 4,036 putative OGs for the presence of two or more sequences (i.e., paralogous sequences) from a taxon. For each putative OG, we first aligned its protein sequences using the program MAFFT, version 7.299 (Katoh and Standley, 2013), with the parameters “–auto” and “–maxiterate 1000” and removed columns whose site occupancy was less than 0.01 from the resultant alignment using the program Phyutility, version 2.2.6 (Smith and Dunn, 2008), with the parameters “-aa” and “-clean 0.01.” We then used each trimmed OG alignment to reconstruct a quick but “approximate” maximum likelihood (ML) tree using the program FastTree, version 2.1.9 (Price et al., 2010), with the LG model of amino acid substitutions (Le and Gascuel, 2008), a discrete gamma approximation with 20 categories (-gamma), 4 rounds of minimum-evolution subtree-prune-regraft moves (-spr 4), and the more exhaustive ML nearest-neighbor interchange option enabled (-mlacc 2 -slownni). Whenever there were 2 or more protein sequences from a specific taxon in a given OG, we identified the best (i.e., putatively orthologous) one by using a tree-based method (maximally inclusive subtree) implemented in PhyloTreePruner, version 1.0 with a minimum internal support value of 0.95 (Kocot et al., 2013). This resulted in the retention of 2,908 OGs with gene occupancy ≥ 50%.
In step 3, we performed multiple sequence alignment for each of the 2,908 OGs using the E-INS-i strategy (–genafpair–maxiterate 1000) as implemented by the program MAFFT, version 7.299 (Katoh and Standley, 2013), and excluded ambiguously aligned regions using trimAl v1.4 with the “gappyout” option on (Capella-Gutiérrez et al., 2009). We then examined all the resulting alignments and removed protein sequences whose lengths were shorter than 50% the length of the trimmed multiple sequence alignment length of the OG to which they belonged. We also removed OGs whose total trimmed multiple sequence alignment length was < 167 amino acid sites. These filters resulted in the retention of 2,424 OGs, each of which had ≥ 50% gene occupancy and ≥ 167 amino acid site alignment length.
In step 4, to minimize the inclusion of potentially spurious sequences, we inferred an ML phylogram for each OG using IQ-TREE 1.5.1 (Nguyen et al., 2015) with an automatic detection for the best-fitting model of amino acid evolution and then used the ML phylogram to identify and to remove all protein sequences that resulted in terminal branch lengths that were at least 20-times longer than the median of all terminal branch lengths across the phylogram. This step led to the removal of 421 potentially spurious sequences from 292 OGs; the remaining 2,132 OGs did not contain any spurious sequences.
In the final step (step 5), we redid mutiple sequence alignment and trimming for those 292 OGs that we removed as spurious sequences as part of step 4. From the 292 OGs, 276 OGs retained ≥ 50% gene occupancy and ≥ 167 amino acid site alignment length and, thus, were kept; the remaining 16 were discarded.
Retention of the 2,132 OGs from step 4 and the 276 OGs from step 5 yielded a final data matrix consisting of 2,408 orthologous groups (OGs) (1,162,805 amino acid sites) of genes from the 332 budding yeast taxa and 11 outgroups.
b) 1292BUSCO data matrix
As BUSCO genes are a set of reliable markers for phylogenomic inference of diverse lineages (Waterhouse et al., 2017), including the budding yeasts (Shen et al., 2016a), we used 1,757 / 1,759 single-copy, full-length BUSCO genes from 332 budding yeasts and 11 outgroups to construct a data matrix (the EOG09344D43 and EOG09344ST8 BUSCO genes were excluded because we were unable to consistently recover them from our genomes). The number of BUSCO genes whose protein sequences are all present in the same orthologous group (OG) identified by OrthoMCL with the inflation value of 1.5 is 1,650 (∼94% out of 1,757). Multiple sequence alignment; trimming of ambiguously aligned regions; removal of short, spurious, or paralogous sequences; and filtering for ≥ 50% gene occupancy and ≥ 167 amino acid site alignment length were done in the same way as described above for the 2408OG data matrix. Application of these filters resulted in a data matrix of 1,292 BUSCO genes (527,069 amino acid sites), each of which had ≥ 50% gene occupancy and ≥ 167 amino acid site alignment length.
c) 7 additional subsampled data matrices
To explore the stability of phylogenetic relationships among the 332 budding yeasts, we constructed 7 additional data matrices by subsampling subsets of OGs from the 2408OG data matrix as follows:
1.
OG2BUSCO data matrix: This data matrix was constructed by retaining only those OGs that were present in both the 2408OG data matrix and the 1292BUSCO data matrix. Overlapping OGs between the two data matrices were determined by BLASTP (e-value cutoff of 10−10). Briefly, a query 2408OG sequence was considered to be overlapping to a subject 1292BUSCO sequence only if they were from the same taxon and were at least 95% similar at the protein sequence level. OGs between the two data matrices were considered overlapping only if all their sequences were overlapping, resulting in a data matrix of 1,081 OGs (545,300 amino acid sites), each of which had ≥ 50% gene occupancy and ≥ 167 amino acid site alignment length.
2.
OG2PHYLOME data matrix: This data matrix was constructed by retaining only those OGs that were present in both the 2408OG data matrix and the phylomeDB, version 4 (Huerta-Cepas et al., 2014). First, 1,838 orthologs from the S. cerevisiae phylome (P21) containing at least 11 taxa were selected. The S. cerevisiae phylome was curated using 21 budding yeast genomes (8 are representatives from the CUG-Ser1 clade; 12 are representatives from the Saccharomycetaceae; 1 is a representative from the Dipodascaceae/Trichomonascaceae clade). Overlap between the two sets of OGs was determined in the same way as described above for the OG2BUSCO data matrix, resulting in a data matrix of 819 OGs (317,158 amino acid sites), each of which had ≥ 50% gene occupancy and ≥ 167 amino acid site alignment length.
3.
Top500_ABS data matrix: This data matrix was constructed by retaining the 500 OGs (from the 2408OG data matrix) with the highest average bootstrap support (ABS) value of all internal branches on the ML gene tree (Shen et al., 2016b) and contains 472,241 amino acid sites.
4.
Top500_completeness data matrix: This data matrix was constructed by retaining the 500 OGs (from the 2408OG data matrix) with the highest gene occupancy (Shen et al., 2016b) and contains 295,429 amino acid sites.
5.
Top500_ informativeness data matrix: This data matrix was constructed by retaining the 500 OGs (from the 2408OG data matrix) with the highest information content and contains 174,183 amino acid sites. Information content was calculated based on quartet-mapping (Nieselt-Struwe and von Haeseler, 2001) implemented in MARE, version 0.1.2 (https://www.zfmk.de/de/forschung/forschungszentren-und-gruppen/mare), with default settings.
6.
Top500_length data matrix: This data matrix was constructed by retaining the 500 OGs (from the 2408OG data matrix) with the longest trimmed multiple sequence alignment lengths (Shen et al., 2016b), and contains 494,658 amino acid sites.
7.
Top500_treeness2RCFV data matrix: This data matrix was constructed by retaining the 500 OGs (from the 2408OG data matrix) with the highest ratio of treeness to relative composition frequency variability (RCFV) (Phillips and Penny, 2003, Shen et al., 2016b), and contains 328,534 amino acid sites. Treeness is defined as the ratio (sum of lengths of all internal branches) / (total tree length) (Phillips and Penny, 2003, Shen et al., 2016b). RCFV (Phillips and Penny, 2003) is defined as:
Math Eq Where s is the number of the character states (here the s is 20 for amino acids) and t is the number of taxa in a given trimmed OG alignment. Fij is the frequency of state i for the jth taxon, and Math Eq is the average frequency of state i across t taxa.
Phylogenetic analyses
For each of these 9 data matrices, we inferred individual gene trees, as well as three estimates of the species phylogeny; two species phylogeny estimates were obtained by concatenation (concatenation under a single partition and concatenation under gene-based partitioning) (Rokas et al., 2003) and one by coalescence (Mirarab and Warnow, 2015).
Individual gene tree inference
Individual gene trees were reconstructed using maximum likelihood (ML) analysis. For each gene, we conducted 10 independent tree searches (5 used starting trees inferred by parsimony and the other 5 used random starting trees) to obtain the best-scoring ML tree using RAxML, multithread version 8.2.3 (Stamatakis, 2014), under the best-fitting model of amino acid substitution selected by the IQ-TREE program (option -m TEST -mrate G4) with the Bayesian information criterion (BIC).
Concatenation-based ML species tree inference
Our recent evaluation of 19 empirical phylogenomic data matrices showed that IQ-TREE and RAxML/ExaML typically recovered the ML trees with the highest-observed likelihood scores (Zhou et al., 2018). Moreover, our pilot concatenation-based ML tree inferences under a single “LG (Le and Gascuel, 2008) +G4 (Yang, 1996)” model of amino acid substitutions using the multi-threaded version of IQ-TREE v1.5.1 (Nguyen et al., 2015) and the MPI parallel version of ExaML v3.0.17 (Kozlov et al., 2015) for the 2408OG and 1292BUSCO data matrices, showed that IQ-TREE and ExaML produced topologically identical ML trees with very similar likelihood scores, but IQ-TREE did so faster (IQ-TREE: ∼3,000 CPU hours / single tree search; ExaML: ∼4,200 CPU hours / single tree search). Therefore, we adopted the program IQ-TREE to infer concatenation-based ML trees under a single partition (LG+G4) and gene-based partitions (i.e., model parameters were unlinked across genes with the -q option in IQ-TREE), respectively. Branch support for each internode in the ML tree was evaluated with 100 rapid bootstrapping replicates using RAxML, hybrid version 8.2.3 (Stamatakis, 2014) with the CAT model with 25 categories instead of G4 model.
Coalescence-based species tree inference
For each data matrix, we used the set of individual ML gene trees (see section on individual gene tree inference above) to infer the coalescence-based phylogeny with ASTRAL-II, version 4.10.2 (Mirarab and Warnow, 2015). This is a summary species tree method that aims to account for individual gene tree heterogeneity due to incomplete lineage sorting (ILS). The reliability of each internal branch in the coalescence-based species tree was evaluated using the local posterior probability (LPP) measure.
Quantification of incongruence
For each of 27 species phylogenies inferred from the 9 data matrices (2 original data matrices + 7 subsampled data matrices) under the three different approaches (two concatenation-based and one coalescence-based), we used internode certainty (ICA) to quantify the degree of incongruence for every internode by considering all prevalent conflicting bipartitions among individual ML gene trees (Salichos and Rokas, 2013). The (partial) internode certainty (ICA) values were calculated as implemented in RAxML, multithread version 8.2.3 (option -f i).
Molecular dating
We used the Bayesian method MCMCTree in the paml4.9e package (Yang, 2007) to estimate divergence times among the 332 budding yeasts using the 2408OG data matrix. The input tree was derived from the concatenation-based ML analysis under a single LG+G4 model (Figure 2). Since budding yeasts lack a reliable fossil record, we adopted four well-estimated ranges of divergence from four internodes of the budding yeast phylogeny as our calibrations (Kumar et al., 2017, Marcet-Houben and Gabaldón, 2015). These were: the Saccharomyces cerevisiae –Saccharomyces uvarum split (lower bound: 14.3 MYA – upper bound: 17.94 MYA), the Saccharomyces cerevisiae - Kluyveromyces lactis split (103 MYA – 126 MYA), the Saccharomyces cerevisiae - Candida albicans split (161 MYA – 447 MYA), and the origin of the subphylum Saccharomycotina (304 MYA –590 MYA).
Because Bayesian molecular dating is computationally intractable for data matrices that contain hundreds of species and thousands of genes (Irisarri et al., 2017), such as the 2408OG one, we created 50 replicate data matrices, each of which comprised of a different, randomly chosen subset of 100 OGs, to infer the budding yeast timetree (inference of each of the replicates took ∼500 CPU hours). For each replicate, we first estimated branch lengths under a single LG+G4 model with codeml in the paml4.9 e package (Yang, 2007) and obtained a rough mean of the overall mutation rate. Next, we applied the approximate likelihood method (dos Reis and Yang, 2011) to estimate the gradient vector and Hessian matrix with Taylor expansion (option usedata = 3). Last, we assigned (a) the gamma-Dirichlet prior for the overall substitution rate (option rgene_gamma) as G(1, 12.5), with a mean of 0.08 (meaning 8 × 10−10 amino acid substitutions per site per year), (b) the gamma-Dirichlet prior for the rate-drift parameter (option sigma2 gamma) as G(1, 10), and (c) the parameters for the birth-death sampling process with birth and death rates λ = μ = 1 and sampling fraction ρ = 0. We employed the autocorrelated-rate model (option clock = 3) to account for the rate variation across different lineages and used soft bounds (left and right tail probabilities equal 0.025) to set minimum and maximum values for the four calibration splits mentioned above. The MCMC run was first run for 100,000 iterations as burn-in, then sampled every 500 iterations until a total of 3,000 samples was collected. Lastly, the divergence time estimate for each internal branch was calculated as the average across the timetrees produced by the 50 replicates.
In addition to the Bayesian MCMCTree method, we also used the non-Bayesian RelTime method, as implemented in the command line version of MEGA7 (Kumar et al., 2016). As RelTime is computationally much less demanding than MCMCTree (Mello et al., 2017), we conducted divergence time estimation using the complete 2408OG data matrix. We used the same ML tree and calibrations as we did for the MCMCTree analysis (see above).
Comparison of divergence time estimates between RelTime and MCMCTree revealed that they were broadly consistent (Pearson’s correlation coefficient r = 0.87, P-value < 2.2e-16; average time deviation = ∼19.5%), which is in agreement with a previously published comparison of the two methods based on analyses of 8 empirical phylogenomic data matrices (Mello et al., 2017). Furthermore, both our study and that of Mello et al. (2017) found that the RelTime estimates were generally older than MCMCTree estimates for the deep internodes of the budding yeast phylogeny (e.g., for the internodes between 12 major clades) and were generally younger than the MCMCTree estimates for shallower internodes (e.g., within the families Pichiaceae, Saccharomycodaceae, Saccharomycetaceae, Phaffomycetaceae, the CUG-Ala clade, and the CUG-Ser1 clade).
Horizontal gene transfer analyses
Identification of HGT events
To detect genes in budding yeast genomes that may have been horizontally acquired from non-fungal organisms, we employed a robust and conservative phylogeny-based approach (Husnik and McCutcheon, 2018, Marcet-Houben and Gabaldón, 2010, Richards et al., 2011, Wisecaver et al., 2016). Briefly, for a given budding yeast gene, we inferred it to have been acquired by HGT if there was substantial topological disagreement between the gene tree and its associated species tree and the budding yeast gene sequence was robustly nested within the donor lineage in the gene tree.
To avoid spurious results due to the presence of small genomic fragments of contaminant organisms in our genome assemblies (Schönknecht et al., 2014), we limited our analyses to those genes that resided in genomic contigs or scaffolds that were ≥ 100 kb. This filter resulted in the analysis of 1,538,912 predicted genes (out of a total of 1,892,694 genes) in 329 yeast genomes. The remaining three genomes (Botryozyma nematodophila, Blastobotrys nivea, and Citeromyces siamensis) did not contain genomic contigs that were ≥ 100 kb).
For each gene, we evaluated whether it had been horizontally acquired using a two-step workflow.
In step 1, we first carried out a BLASTP search against a custom database (nr+) consisting of the NCBI non-redundant (nr) protein database (last accessed January 20, 2017) and all predicted protein sequences from 329 yeasts genomes, with an e-value cutoff of 10−10. We next used custom Perl scripts to: (a) assign taxonomic information to each BLAST hit rating with the dump files downloaded from the NCBI Taxonomy database (nodes.dmp, merged.dmp, and names.dmp; ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pub/taxonomy), and then (b) parse the BLAST hits, based on their taxonomic information, into three different lineages (RECIPIENT: Saccharomycotina; GROUP: Fungi; OUTGROUP: non-fungal) so as to obtain three values: bbhO (BLAST bitscore of the best hit in OUTGROUP lineage), bbhG (bitscore of the best hit in GROUP lineage but not in RECIPIENT lineage), and maxB (bitscore of the query to itself).
Using this information, we next calculated: (a) the Alien Index (AI) value (Wisecaver et al., 2016), which is a normalized difference of bitscore between the best hit in OUTGROUP lineage and the best hit in GROUP lineage but not in RECIPIENT lineage: Math Eq, and (b) the percentage of species from OUTGROUP lineage (outg_pct) in the list of the top 300 hits that have different taxonomic species names (so that we avoid over-representation of multiple strains of the same species) (Marcet-Houben and Gabaldón, 2010). From the 1,538,912 genes analyzed, we found 1,806 genes with AI value ≥ 0.1 and outg_pct ≥ 90%.
In step 2, we retrieved the 300 most similar homologs that have different taxonomic species names from the nr+ database (see above), aligned them by the MAFFT, version 7.299 (Katoh and Standley, 2013), with “–auto” option, and trimmed ambiguously aligned regions using trimAl v1.4 (Capella-Gutiérrez et al., 2009) with “-automated1” option. We then used the resulting alignment to infer the ML tree using IQ-TREE 1.5.1 (Nguyen et al., 2015) with its best-fitting model of amino acid evolution and 1000 ultrafast bootstrapping replicates (Minh et al., 2013). Lastly, we rooted each ML tree at the midpoint using the ape and phangorn R packages and visualized it using the command version of iTOL v3 (Letunic and Bork, 2016). After manually inspecting all 1,806 ML trees, we identified 878 genes in 186 / 329 budding yeast genomes whose phylogenies indicated they were putatively acquired via HGT. A summary table file that contains species name, gene name, genomic contig ID, genomic contig length, HGT status, and Gene Ontology (GO) term for each of 1,538,912 genes in 329 yeast genomes that we examined has been deposited on the Figshare data repository.
Analysis of HGT-acquired genes
For each of 878 genes inferred to have been horizontally transferred into budding yeast genomes, we used the gene sequence and taxon names of their closest relatives on the ML tree to infer the gene name, gene function, and likely donor lineage of the HGT-acquired gene (Table S3). To examine the biological processes, cellular components, and molecular functions that these 878 HGT-acquired genes are associated with, we conducted gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis using topGO 2.28.0 (Alexa and Rahnenfuhrer, 2016). We found that these genes were significantly enriched in metabolism-related terms, such as metabolic process, oxidation-reduction process, carbohydrate metabolic process (terms in Biological process), beta−galactosidase complex, integral component of membrane (terms in Cellular component), acetyltransferase activity, and catalytic activity (terms in Molecular function) (Figure S5). In the list of 878 putative HGT-acquired genes (Table S3), the largest number of horizontally acquired genes, 169, was found in the genome of W. versatilis, one of the six representative species from the W/S clade (Figure 3A). Transcriptome data in NCBI (SRA accession numbers: SRR5942408, SRR5942407, SRR5942426, SRR5942425, SRR5942428, SRR5942427, SRR5942422, SRR5942421) showed that at least 91 of its 169 horizontally acquired genes had expression values ≥ 5 FPKM (Fragments Per Kilobase per Million mapped fragments), suggesting that most are likely functional. Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis of 169 HGT-acquired genes in the genome of W. versatilis show they are significantly enriched in GO term functions and processes, such as oxidation-reduction process, metabolic process, catalytic activity, cofactor binding, and oxidoreductase activity.
Examination of the 878 HGT-acquired gene phylogenies showed that they stem from 365 distinct HGT events, 230 species-specific ones and 135 that involve two or more species (Figure S4; Table S3). The average age of these 365 HGT events was 66.3 MYA (95% credibility interval: 56.6-76.0), the average protein sequence identity between the HGT-acquired yeast gene and the most closely related non-fungal donor gene was 58%, and the average percentage of descendent species that retained a given HGT-acquired gene was 40.7%. These results suggest that most HGT events tend to affect one or a few species, they are relatively ancient or divergent, and are frequently lost.
Finally, the examination of the genomic locations of the 878 HGT-acquired genes showed that 77 genes were physically linked in 13 contiguous clusters of 3 or more genes each. Of these 13 horizontally acquired gene clusters, 4 were shared by several budding yeast species, while the other 9 were species-specific.
Robustness of HGT inference
Inference of HGT can be noise-prone (Husnik and McCutcheon, 2018, Martin, 2018, Roger, 2018). To gauge the robustness of inference of HGT-acquired genes, we performed five additional sets of analyses.
First, we compared the list of 878 putative HGT-acquired genes to the list of 30 previously identified instances of HGT in budding yeasts. We found that 21 / 30 (70%) of these previously detected instances of HGT were included in our set of 878 HGT-acquired genes, corroborating the sensitivity and conservativeness of our high-throughput approach for identifying HGT (Table S3).
Second, to gauge whether setting the values of AI value ≥ 0.1 and outg_pct ≥ 90% in step 1 was too strict, we also examined the top 1,806 candidates with the highest AI scores for outg_pct ≥ 10%. Examination of the overlap between the set of 1,806 genes recovered with AI value ≥ 0.1 and outg_pct ≥ 90% and the set of the top 1,806 genes recovered with outg_pct ≥ 10% showed that that 605 / 878 strongly supported cases of HGT were present in both sets.
Third, we examined diverse properties of contigs containing HGT-acquired genes and compared to those of contigs lacking HGT-acquired genes. Examination of the distribution of sequence lengths of the 480 genomic contigs that contain 878 HGT-acquired genes, alongside the 8,312 genomic contigs that do not contain any HGT-acquired genes, showed that contigs containing the HGT-acquired genes were typically longer than contigs that lack them. We further used different cutoff values of contig length (from ≥ 100 kb to ≥ 1,500 kb with steps of 100 kb) to examine the percentage of HGT-acquired genes over total number of gene examined and found that it slightly increased with contig size.
Fourth, we compared the percentages of HGT-acquired genes in the 220 newly sequenced genomes and in the 112 publicly available genomes and found them to be similar. In contrast, the percentage of HGT-acquired genes in the 164 genomes with the highest N50 values was significantly higher than the percentage in the 165 genomes the lowest N50 values.
Finally, to test whether the maximum likelihood (ML) gene tree (i.e., the tree with the highest ML score, which shows that the horizontally acquired yeast gene was nested within a clade of non-fungal donor genes) was statistically different from a constrained ML tree in which all fungal and yeast genes were forced to be monophyletic, we applied the approximately unbiased (AU) (Shimodaira, 2002) test in the software package CONSEL (Shimodaira and Hasegawa, 2001), version 0.20. We found that 616 out of 878 putative HGT-acquired genes are significantly supported with the AU test (AU test; p values < 0.05) (Table S3).
Analyses of trait evolution
In this study, we reconstructed the evolution of 45 discrete metabolic traits in 274 budding yeasts representing the 12 major clades. All metabolic trait data were obtained from The Yeasts: A Taxonomic Study and pertain to budding yeasts’ abilities to grow on different substrates (Kurtzman et al., 2011).
For each discrete metabolic trait, we scored each taxon for its ability to grow (hereafter scored as “1”), not grow (hereafter scored as “0”), show variation in growth / absence of growth across different strains (hereafter scored as “v”), or lack of information / missing data (hereafter scored as “n”) (Table S4).
To conduct analyses of trait evolution and ancestral state inference, we used Bayes MultiState module in the BayesTraits, version 3 (Pagel et al., 2004), because of its ability to apply reversible jump MCMC (rjMCMC) to optimize model uncertainty with different parameters. To infer ancestral states and the rates of trait gain and loss, BayesTraits takes as input the species phylogeny, the trait states, and a model of trait evolution. For the input species phylogeny, we used the ML tree with branch lengths inferred from the 2408OG data matrix using a single LG+G4 model (Figure 2), which was then pruned to keep the 274 budding yeast species for which there were metabolic trait data.
For each trait, v and n values were recoded to be “01” (this means that the character’s state can be either “0” or “1”) and “-” in the BayesTraits analyses, respectively. We calculated the rate of gain (q01: rate of change from 0 to 1) and the rate of loss (q10: rate of change from 1 to 0) across the budding yeast phylogeny. To test whether the rates of trait gain and loss were significantly different or not, we compared estimates of marginal likelihoods under a model of trait evolution in which the rates of trait gain and loss were unconstrained against those obtained under a model in which the rates of gain and loss were constrained to be equal. We determined whether the two models were significantly different using log Bayes Factors (lnBF): 2(log marginal likelihood [unconstrained] –log marginal likelihood [constrained]); the rates of gain and loss for a given trait were considered to be significantly different when lnBF > 2.
For each metabolic trait, we also inferred the posterior probability of each of the two character states (0 and 1) at the root (i.e., the budding yeast common ancestor [BYCA]) and at each of 272 internodes across the phylogeny. Each analysis was run for 10 million generations, sampling parameters every 4,000 generations until 2,000 samples were collected. The stepping stone sampler was used to estimate marginal likelihoods, sampling 200 stones in which each stone was run 1,000 generations.
Finally, we plotted the kernel density of the posterior distribution for the rates of trait gain and loss, as well as posterior probabilities (PP) of states 0 and 1 at each internode, and identified the largest peak values from their densities. To visualize the ancestral state at each internode across the budding yeast phylogeny, we used the pie chart function in iTOL v3 (Letunic and Bork, 2016).
Validation of metabolic trait data
As the metabolic trait data in The Yeasts: A Taxonomic Study (Kurtzman et al., 2011) comes from multiple sources, contains missing data, and the strains tested sometimes differ from the sequenced strains, we also experimentally determined the growth for 328 / 332 strains of the budding yeast species whose genomes we used on 13 / 45 discrete metabolic traits, 11 carbon-based and 2 nitrogen-based (Table S4). As a control, we also experimentally determined yeast species growth on glucose, a substrate on which all sampled strains are known to grow (Kurtzman et al., 2011).
Carbon treatment plates contained a minimal media base with ammonium sulfate and one of twelve carbon sources at a 2% concentration (Kurtzman et al., 2011). The 12 carbon sources tested in our analyses included glucose, sucrose, raffinose, galactose, lactose, maltose, cellobiose, L-rhamnose, D-xylose, glycerol, D-glucosamine, and N-acetyl-D-glucosamine. Nitrogen treatment plates contained a minimal media base with either potassium nitrate or sodium nitrite as the nitrogen source and 2% glucose (Kurtzman et al., 2011). Nitrogen treatment plates required two rounds of growth to accurately measure growth of species; therefore, after a week of growth, we pinned the yeast species into a second round of the respective nitrogen source. After a week of growth, we visually scored yeast species for growth on each carbon or nitrogen source. We then compared growth across replicates for each species and treatment; a species was determined to grow on a carbon source if it showed growth ≥ 50% of the time across replicates. Our results show that the average consistency of the character states shared between the compilation of available metabolic trait data and our experimental measurements was 94% (Table S4), suggesting that our inferences are based on accurate data.
Trait and gene association network analyses
Calculations of positive associations among carbon and nitrogen assimilation traits were obtained from a recently published study (Opulente et al., 2018). A positive association network was created in the R package igraph v. 1.0.1 (Csárdi and Nepusz, 2006), and trait communities in these networks were determined through the Clauset-Newman-Moore algorithm (fast.greedy community), an approach that determines communities by maximizing the total network’s modularity.
The input data matrix consisted of species-specific presence and absence data for functional annotations of genes, together with the species-specific qualitative information about their capabilities to grow in the conditions used in the ancestral trait reconstruction analyses. The functional annotations were Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database entries or annotations (Kanehisa et al., 2016b) obtained through GhostKOALA (Kanehisa et al., 2016a). Mutual information coefficients were calculated for each pairwise combination of KEGG annotation and trait using the R packages infotheo, minet (Meyer, 2008, Meyer et al., 2008), and WCGNA (Langfelder and Horvath, 2008), and the resulting association network was trimmed with the ARACNE algorithm (Margolin et al., 2006). Strong associations were defined by a cutoff of 0.15 nats or higher, and weak associations were considered between 0.10 and 0.15 nats. The positive or negative character of the associations was determined by calculating the Jaccard index for each pairwise combination, with a cutoff at 0.25.
Data tracks shown on Figure 5 were subject to the following adjustments: (1) the nitrite growth track contained exclusively data from validation experiments performed in this study (Table S4), due to limited data in the literature (Table S4); (2) for the nitrate growth track, positive growth was imputed in cases of disagreement between the validation and literature; and (3) due to partial annotation redundancy for specific steps of the Moco biosynthesis pathway, MOCS1 and MOCS2 data tracks were collated from multiple annotations, with MOCS1 activity being considered present if either the K03637, K03639, or K20967 KEGG annotation was found in a genome and with MOCS2 activity being considered present if either the K03635, K03636, or K21232 KEGG annotation was found in a genome.

Cells constantly adapt to environmental fluctuations. These physiological changes require time and therefore cause a lag phase during which the cells do not function optimally. Interestingly, past exposure to an environmental condition can shorten the time needed to adapt when the condition re-occurs, even in daughter cells that never directly encountered the initial condition. Here, we use the molecular toolbox of Saccharomyces cerevisiae to systematically unravel the molecular mechanism underlying such history-dependent behavior in transitions between glucose and maltose. In contrast to previous hypotheses, the behavior does not depend on persistence of proteins involved in metabolism of a specific sugar. Instead, presence of glucose induces a gradual decline in the cells’ ability to activate respiration, which is needed to metabolize alternative carbon sources. These results reveal how trans-generational transitions in central carbon metabolism generate history-dependent behavior in yeast, and provide a mechanistic framework for similar phenomena in other cell types.

https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.39234.001
“ Open annotations. The current annotation count on this page is 0.
Introduction
Cells can face sudden and dramatic changes in their environment such as nutrient depletion, temperature shifts, and osmotic shock. In general, cells adapt to such changes by activating and repressing specific genes and processes required to function in the new environment (Brewster et al., 1993; Gasch et al., 2000; Jacob and Monod, 1961; Mitchell et al., 2009a; Perez-Samper et al., 2018). Such physiological re-programming can take a considerable amount of time and resources during which the cells do not function optimally, a phenomenon known as the lag phase. Interestingly, recent exposure to a specific environment can shorten the lag time needed to adapt when the same stimulus re-occurs, even in daughter cells that have not directly experienced the initial change (D'Urso et al., 2016; Guan et al., 2012; Zacharioudakis et al., 2007). This phenomenon is referred to as ‘history-dependent behavior’ (HDB). HDB is believed to allow cells to more quickly adapt (i.e. reduced lag duration) when a similar environment returns. Such HDB often extends over several cellular generations, and is therefore sometimes considered to be a form of rudimentary epigenetic behavior or ‘cellular memory’.

HDB has been described in various organisms and cell types, ranging from microbes to humans. Some of the best-documented cases, sometimes referred to as ‘metabolic programming’, involve a switch in nutrient status. One example occurs in pancreatic cells, where previous exposure to high glucose levels leads to long-lasting stress and damage, even after the glucose levels have been normalized, and inversely, prolonged tight control of glycemic values results in lasting improvements, even when glucose levels are not tightly controlled (Tonna et al., 2010). Similarly, prolonged changes in blood glucose levels linked to dietary changes may affect muscle and adipose tissue development, even in a next generation that has never been directly exposed to the nutritional stress (Sharples et al., 2016). Furthermore, trans-generational shift in metabolic state is also observed in exponentially growing yeast cells (Slavov et al., 2014). The mechanisms underlying metabolic programming have not been fully elucidated, although changes in chromatin state have been implicated in the effect.

HDB is easily studied in single-cell organisms because during the lag phase, these cells arrest their growth, making it easy to observe the adaptation process (Acar et al., 2008; Brickner, 2010; D'Urso et al., 2016; Friedman et al., 2014; Guan et al., 2012; Kundu and Peterson, 2010; Light et al., 2010; Mitchell et al., 2009b; Stockwell et al., 2015). One of the best-documented examples of HDB occurs when Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells are repeatedly shifted between glucose and galactose (Stockwell et al., 2015). The first shift from glucose to galactose generates a slow induction of the GAL genes, with an associated long lag phase. When the same population is returned to glucose and subsequently switched back to galactose, the GAL induction rate and growth response is significantly faster. This HDB can extend for up to 12 hr after the shift from galactose to glucose. The 12 h-period in glucose during which the HDB is retained corresponds to approximately five cellular generations, at which point less than 4% of the cells has directly experienced galactose before (Kundu and Peterson, 2010; Sood et al., 2017; Stockwell and Rifkin, 2017; Stockwell et al., 2015; Zacharioudakis et al., 2007). A similar phenomenon occurs when S. cerevisiae cells are switched between glucose and maltose (New et al., 2014), and when E. coli cells are switched between glucose and lactose (Lambert et al., 2014).

The molecular principles underlying this type of HDB are only recently being uncovered. In general, transcriptional induction of genes which are crucial for rapid growth in the inducing environment (e.g. GAL gene induction in galactose) are assumed to be the rate-limiting step determining the length of the lag phase (Lambert et al., 2014; New et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2015). As a consequence, HDB observed at the level of growth is often thought to be linked to a similar effect in the induction of specific genes. More specifically, the regulatory networks governing induction of these specific genes are believed to have intrinsic properties that allow faster re-induction if the genes have been recently induced, which in turn leads to a faster resumption of cellular growth (D'Urso et al., 2016; Stockwell et al., 2015; Zacharioudakis et al., 2007). Importantly, however, the assumption that growth resumption is directly governed by the induction kinetics of nutrient-specific genes has not been supported by strong experimental evidence.

Two major molecular mechanisms have been proposed for HDB on the level of transcription. First, a previous induction of a gene may generate an epigenetically heritable shift in local chromatin structure that allows for quicker re-induction after a short time in the repressive condition (Brickner, 2010; Brickner et al., 2007; D'Urso et al., 2016; Tan-Wong et al., 2009). The second proposed mechanism is the transgenerational persistence of specific proteins, referred to as ‘protein inheritance’ or ‘protein perdurance’. This mechanism assumes that proteins needed in one environment do not immediately disappear when cells are shifted to a new environment. During cell division, some of these lingering proteins can be transmitted to the daughter cell and influence how this cell functions, leading to HDB. One of the best-studied examples of such protein inheritance occurs in galactose-to-glucose shifts in S. cerevisiae. Cells growing in galactose have high levels of the galactokinase enzyme Gal1p. When these cells are shifted to glucose, the GAL1 gene is repressed and the Gal1 proteins that were present are gradually diluted as the cells divide. However, when the cells are shifted again to galactose before the cellular Gal1p levels reach a basal level, the remaining Gal1 proteins may allow faster re-induction of the whole set of Gal proteins needed to resume growth (Stockwell et al., 2015; Zacharioudakis et al., 2007).

Though these are both plausible mechanisms, it is important to note that the causative role of Gal1 protein inheritance has not yet been confirmed and that environmental shifts can cause much broader changes in transcriptional activity. Transitions to glucose stimulate genes involved in fermentation and cellular growth and repress genes involved in respiration, the glyoxylate and TCA cycles, gluconeogenesis, synthesis of fatty acids and storage carbohydrates, and stress resistance (Conrad et al., 2014; Zaman et al., 2008). Some of these processes could be prime determinants (bottlenecks) of the lag time, while the activation of the GAL genes is a vital last step to resume growth, but could be less important in determining the lag time and HDB.

To obtain a systematic and thorough understanding of HDB in fluctuating carbon sources, we combine genome-wide assays (Bar-Seq and transcriptomics) with various single-cell analyses. Specifically, we show that the duration of the lag phase when cells are switched from glucose to maltose depends on the duration of growth in glucose, with longer exposure to glucose eliciting longer lag times. In contrast to what has been previously suggested, our results show that this HDB does not rely on inheritance of dedicated nutrient-specific proteins (in this case the Mal proteins). Instead, several lines of evidence point towards the existence of a much broader mechanism for HDB than previously assumed. Repression of respiratory pathways during glucose growth and the subsequent re-induction upon shift to maltose appears to be playing a key role in HDB. Firstly, we observe that not only pre-growth in maltose, but also pre-growth in galactose leads to shorter lag in maltose. Secondly, using heterokaryon cells with two nuclei with distinct pre-growth conditions, we show that the HDB is linked to the cytoplasm rather than the nucleus. Thirdly, genome-wide assays show that genes involved in mitochondrial function and respiration play a central role in HDB. Fourthly, inhibiting respiration prolongs the lag phase even in cells that only grew for short periods in glucose. Finally, over-activating respiration through overexpression of the HAP4 respiratory regulator abolishes the HDB and results in nearly constant short lag phases.

Taken together, our data shows that, in contrast to previous suggestions, HDB in changing carbon environments is not the consequence of changes in chromatin state or persistence of a few metabolism-specific proteins. Instead, the effect depends on a much broader metabolic network, with slow changes in respiration and fermentation playing a key role.

Results
S. cerevisiae demonstrates strong HDB for glucose-to-maltose and glucose-to-galactose shifts
Cells demonstrate HDB for the shift between glucose and maltose (Figure 1 and Figure 1—figure supplement 1). Cultures of S. cerevisiae were adapted to maltose and subsequently transferred to glucose for different lengths of time (0, 2, 4, 6, 8 and 24 hr). The cells were then transferred back to maltose, where they experienced a lag phase before resuming growth (Figure 1A). The duration of the respective lag phases was measured both at the population level and at the single-cell level (Figure 1B–E). Both methods establish that the duration of the lag phase depends greatly on the duration of the preceding glucose growth, with longer glucose exposure leading to longer lag times. Interestingly, our single-cell measurements show that the increasing lag times are a result of individual cells taking more time to resume growth, as well as an increasing fraction of cells that do not resume growth at all (Figure 1E). Moreover, this HDB is not unique to maltose-glucose-maltose shifts. We observe a similar behavior in galactose-glucose-galactose shifts and also in glycerol-glucose-glycerol shifts, suggesting that this is a commonly occurring phenomenon (Figure 1—figure supplements 1 and 2).

Figure 1 with 6 supplements Download asset Open asset
 
The lag time after glucose-maltose shifts depends on the time grown in glucose.
(A) Experimental set-up for measuring HDB. Cultures adapted to maltose growth are transferred to glucose for different times (0, 2, 4, 6, 8, 24 hr). Then, these cultures are transferred back to … see more

https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.39234.002
Figure 1—figure supplement 6 Download asset Open asset
 
The effect of cell density before the shift to maltose on lag time.
After maltose pre-growth followed by 24 hr of glucose growth, cultures with different population densities were transferred back to maltose.

https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.39234.008
Figure 1—figure supplement 5 Download asset Open asset
 
The effect of cell density before the shift to glucose on lag time.
At the end of maltose pre-growth, cultures with different population densities were transferred to glucose for 6 hr before the final shift back to maltose.

https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.39234.007
Figure 1—figure supplement 4 Download asset Open asset
 
HDB in non-laboratory strains.
Cultures of L-1374 and BC187 strains were pre-grown in maltose, transferred to glucose and grown there for different durations, and then transferred back to maltose. The single-cell lag time …  see more

https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.39234.006
Figure 1—figure supplement 3 Download asset Open asset
 
Different periods of growth on glucose does not alter growth resumption dynamics after shift to fresh glucose.
In order to control for the effect of media alterations during extended glucose growth times, the cells were pre-grown in glucose, then transferred to fresh glucose and grown there for different …  see more

https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.39234.005
Figure 1—figure supplement 2 Download asset Open asset
 
The lag time after shifts to glycerol depends on the time grown in glucose Accumulative distribution of single-cell lag times for glucose-glycerol shifts after pre-growth in glycerol.
https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.39234.004
Figure 1—figure supplement 1 Download asset Open asset
 
The lag time after shifts to galactose depends on the time grown in glucose.
Accumulative distribution of single-cell lag times for glucose-galactose shifts after pre-growth in galactose.

https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.39234.003
Although we always kept the cell populations very dilute, we wanted to confirm that HDB is not due to alterations in nutrient content of media during extended growth times. We therefore measured single cell lag times after glucose-glucose-glucose shifts, with different durations of intermediate glucose growth. No detectable pattern in the dynamics of growth resumption upon shift to the new media is observed (Figure 1—figure supplement 3).

Finally, we observe that HDB is also present, albeit to different extents, in L-1374 and BC187, two non-laboratory strains (Cubillos et al., 2009) (Figure 1—figure supplement 4).

HDB does not depend on mal or gal protein inheritance
Initially, we hypothesized that HDB after a shift to maltose might be explained by the same molecular mechanisms that have been suggested to underlie HDB after a shift from glucose to galactose, where perdurance of Gal proteins after a shift from galactose to glucose has been suggested to shorten the lag phase when the cells are again shifted to galactose. Thus, we hypothesized that proteins required for maltose metabolism could persist for some time during growth on glucose and might enable swift restart of growth when maltose is present again (Zacharioudakis et al., 2007).

A simple way to investigate whether Mal protein perdurance underlies the HDB is to change the pre-growth on maltose to a pre-growth on galactose. In galactose, the intracellular concentration of the maltose-cleaving enzyme, Mal12p, measured using fluorescent protein fusions, was approximately 70 times less than its concentration in maltose, and we were unable to detect the presence of the maltose-transporter Mal1p (Figure 2C). We thus compared the lag duration in maltose-glucose-maltose shifts to galactose-glucose-maltose shifts (Figure 2A and Figure 2—figure supplement 1). Surprisingly, compared to pre-growth in maltose, pre-growth in galactose actually increased the timescale over which HDB occurs and generally reduced the lag time after short glucose periods. This is the opposite of what is expected if the inheritance of Mal proteins would be solely responsible for the HDB after glucose-to-maltose shifts.

Figure 2 with 4 supplements Download asset Open asset
 
MAL/GAL protein levels are not always correlated with the lag time.
(A) The effect of pre-growth in maltose or galactose on HDB after glucose-maltose shifts. (B) The effect of pre-growth in maltose or galactose on HDB after glucose-galactose shifts. (C) Inheritance … see more

https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.39234.009
Figure 2—figure supplement 4 Download asset Open asset
 
The effect of replicative age on the single-cell lag time.
The results from a Cox proportional hazard model which also takes into account budding/unbudding as a covariate is shown. After accounting for the latter variable, we find that replicate age is not …  see more

https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.39234.013
Figure 2—figure supplement 3 Download asset Open asset
 
The effect of having or not having a bud on lag time.
Using the Cox proportional hazard model, we find that budding cells are on average 60% more likely to escape the lag at any given time point after the shift (data point on the x-axis). This value …  see more

https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.39234.012
Figure 2—figure supplement 2 Download asset Open asset
 
Single-cell lag times for glucose-galactose shifts with pre-growth in maltose or galactose.
Average single-cell lag time (upper) and fraction of cells escaping (lower) is plotted against time for shifts to galactose with pre-growth in maltose (blue) or galactose (red).

https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.39234.011
Figure 2—figure supplement 1 Download asset Open asset
 
Single-cell lag times for glucose-maltose shifts with pre-growth in maltose or galactose.
Average single-cell lag time (upper) and fraction of cells escaping (lower) is plotted against time for shifts to maltose with pre-growth in maltose (blue) or galactose (red). After maltose …  see more

https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.39234.010
Although the Mal proteins are gradually diluted over several generations after a switch from maltose to glucose (Figure 2C), the persistence of the Mal proteins does not cause a shorter lag phase after the shift back into maltose. Indeed, even though the correlation between Mal12p/Mal11p levels and the population lag time is strong after maltose pre-growth, there is little correlation between Mal protein levels and glucose-to-maltose lag duration when cells are first pre-grown in galactose before they are shifted to glucose and then to maltose (Figure 2E). Therefore, the observed correlation after pre-growth in maltose seems to only reflect the number of generations of growth in glucose.

A similar set of experiments was performed to test whether Gal protein inheritance causes HDB after a glucose-galactose shift. Galactose pre-growth increased the timescale over which HDB occurs and resulted in generally shorter lags compared to the maltose pre-growth (Figure 2B and Figure 2—figure supplement 2). The inverse correlation between remaining Gal1p levels and lag times appears to support the previously reported hypothesis that Gal protein inheritance is indeed responsible for quicker re-activation of GAL genes and subsequent escape from the lag phase (Zacharioudakis et al., 2007). However, pre-growth on maltose, which does not result in measurable Gal1p levels (Figure 2D), also leads to considerable HDB (Figure 2B). Moreover, whereas there is a clear correlation between Gal1p levels and the population lag time after galactose pre-growth, there is little correlation when cells are pre-grown on maltose (Figure 2F). Together, these results suggest that, similar to what we observed for the role of Mal proteins in shifts from glucose to maltose, Gal protein levels are not the major determinants of HDB after glucose-galactose shifts.

Mal or gal protein inheritance does not explain cell-to-cell variability in lag duration
The lag duration of cells within an isogenic population is typically heterogeneous when observed at the single-cell level, and the heterogeneity increases with longer pre-growth in glucose before the switch to maltose or galactose. Some cells escape the lag phase within 6 hr, others take more than 20 hr, and some never resume growth within the timeframe of our experiments (Figure 1D,E and Figure 1—figure supplement 1). To investigate whether this variability is linked to protein perdurance, we correlated Mal and Gal protein expression levels immediately after cells leave glucose with the individual lag times after the respective carbon source shift (Figure 2G,H,I). In both cases, we find that variability in the level of inherited proteins does not explain the variability in single-cell lag times (R2 <0.11). Such absence of a strong correlation further confirms that there are other factors apart from Mal or Gal protein inheritance influencing the lag time after shifts from glucose to either maltose or galactose.

We hypothesized that the observed heterogeneity in single-cell lag times could potentially be explained by cell cycle stage or replicative age. We investigated the effect of cell cycle stage on lag time by observing whether the cells were budding at the time of the shift (Figure 2—figure supplement 3). This parameter was included as a covariate in a Cox proportional hazard model and was found to be a significant factor in 5 out of 16 experiments, increasing the likelihood of escape on average by 60%. However, this factor on average describes less than 4% of the variability in single-cell lag times (all Cox pseudo-R²<0.094), indicating that the influence of cell cycle stage on single-cell lag times is neglectable. The effect of replicative age was investigated by staining bud scars with Calcofluor White (Figure 2—figure supplement 4). The number of bud scars was counted for individual cells, and this number was included as a covariate in the Cox model, together with the (un)budding covariate. Under this model, cells with different replicative ages were not found to have significantly different lag times.

In summary, the variability in single-cell lag times can neither be explained by variability in Mal and Gal protein levels nor by variability in cell cycle stage nor in replicative age.

MAL gene induction correlates with escape from the glucose-to-maltose lag phase
Our results thus far indicate that HDB in shifts from glucose to maltose or galactose does not depend on inheritance of Mal or Gal proteins (Figure 2). However, this does not exclude the possibility that MAL or GAL gene induction is the final event that controls growth resumption. If this is the case, we would expect a strong correlation between the MAL or GAL gene induction time and growth resumption within single cells. To test this, we used fluorescence time-lapse microscopy to track growth and gene expression within microcolonies during the lag phase (Figure 3A).

Figure 3 with 7 supplements Download asset Open asset
 
MAL(GAL) gene induction correlates with escape from the glucose-to-maltose(galactose) lag phase.
(A) Example of tracking of the area and mean fluorescence of a microcolony. All tracked microcolonies initially started out as a single (non-)budding cell. (B) Kymographs showing the evolution of … see more

https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.39234.014
Figure 3—figure supplement 7 Download asset Open asset
 
A mating assay indicates a cytoplasmic step which controls the rate of MAL gene induction.
Cells with opposite mating types and yellow or red fluorescent Mal12 protein fusions are grown separately on either glucose or maltose. Next, these cultures are mixed and grown in glucose for 4 hr. …  see more

https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.39234.021
Figure 3—figure supplement 6 Download asset Open asset
 
A mating assay shows that, after short periods of glucose growth, cells contain factor(s) which promote rapid growth re-initiation.
Cells with opposite mating type are grown separately on either glucose or maltose. Next, these cultures are mixed and grown in glucose for 4 hr. During this time, some cells will mate and give rise …  see more

https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.39234.020
Figure 3—figure supplement 5 Download asset Open asset
 
Effect of constitutive expression of the MAL genes on HDB with galactose pre-growth.
Lag time of single and dual overexpression strains of MAL11 and MAL12 is shown for glucose-maltose shifts with pre-growth in galactose.

https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.39234.019
Figure 3—figure supplement 4 Download asset Open asset
 
Effect of constitutive expression of the MAL genes on HDB with maltose pre-growth.
Lag time of single and dual overexpression strains of MAL11 and MAL12 is shown for glucose-maltose shifts with pre-growth in maltose.

https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.39234.018
Figure 3—figure supplement 3 Download asset Open asset
 
Correlation between the time of Gal1 induction and the fold area increase that occurred until this event.
Cells were pre-grown in galactose, switched to glucose for 8 hr, and back to galactose where the gene induction was tracked using a fluorescent protein fusion. Axes are broken to indicate events …  see more

https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.39234.017
Figure 3—figure supplement 2 Download asset Open asset
 
Correlation between the time of Mal11 induction and the fold area increase that occurred until this event.
Cells were pre-grown in maltose, switched to glucose for 6 hr, and back to maltose where the gene induction was tracked using a fluorescent protein fusion. Axes are broken to indicate events that …  see more

https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.39234.016
Figure 3—figure supplement 1 Download asset Open asset
 
Correlation between the time of Mal12 induction and the fold area increase that occurred until this event.
Cells were pre-grown in maltose, switched to glucose for 6 hr, and back to maltose where the gene induction was tracked using a fluorescent protein fusion. Axes are broken to indicate events that …  see more

https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.39234.015
MAL gene induction dynamics after a glucose-to-maltose shift coincide with the resumption of rapid growth (Figure 3B). Within all observed microcolonies, MAL gene induction is followed by rapid and exponential growth and microcolonies that do not induce the MAL genes show little to no growth. Unexpectedly, we find many cells in which MAL gene induction is preceded by a period of slow growth (Figure 3B). However, the amount of growth without MAL gene induction is limited, as most microcolonies do not increase more than 2-fold in area before induction is detected (Figure 3—figure supplements 1 and 2).

It is possible that the slow growth indicates a period where MAL gene induction has started but proceeds at a slow rate. Slow induction could lead to production of low levels of Mal proteins that are undetectable by our methods, but are sufficient to allow growth. To investigate this, we measured the growth dynamics in a wild-type strain and a strain in which all MAL genes were deleted (Figure 3D). In general, the mal deletion mutant cannot grow well in maltose. Therefore, we pre-grew both strains in galactose before the shift. After the shift to maltose, the mal deletion strain is able to enter the slow growth phase but, unlike the wild-type, it is unable to shift to rapid exponential growth (Figure 3B,D).

During a glucose-to-galactose shift, GAL gene induction dynamics also coincide with the resumption of rapid growth (Figure 3C). Within all observed microcolonies, GAL gene induction coincides with rapid and exponential growth, while there is little to no growth in microcolonies not inducing the GAL genes. In contrast to glucose-maltose shifts, we do not observe a period of slow growth before GAL gene induction (Figure 3C and Figure 3—figure supplement 3).

We conclude that MAL or GAL gene induction and the resumption of rapid exponential growth coincide, which is consistent with the idea that MAL or GAL gene induction is crucial for cells to resume rapid growth. However, although MAL or GAL gene induction coincides with resumption of rapid exponential growth, this does not necessarily imply that MAL or GAL gene induction is the main determinant of lag phase duration and HDB. In fact, the fact that lag duration does not correlate with Gal and Mal protein levels, and the slow growth before MAL gene expression suggests that other mechanisms may be the main rate-limiting step for cells escaping the lag phase (Figure 3).

Effect of constitutive MAL gene expression on HDB
So far, our results suggest that MAL gene induction is the final, but not the only, event that controls full escape from the lag phase and that the rate of MAL induction does not depend on Mal protein inheritance. To investigate this further, we measured HDB in strains with single or dual overexpression of the genes encoding the maltose-cleaving enzyme Mal12p and the transporter Mal11p (Figure 3—figure supplements 4 and 5). In these experiments, HDB was measured after pre-growth in either maltose or galactose. After maltose pre-growth, we observed the combined effects of constitutive expression and protein inheritance of the Mal proteins that are expressed under their native promoters. After galactose pre-growth, we only observe the effect of constitutive expression.

If induction of the Mal proteins is the crucial step allowing escape from a glucose-to-maltose lag phase, constitutive overexpression of the maltose importer Mal11p and the maltase Mal12p in glucose should reduce the lag to a minimum and abolish the HDB in glucose-to-maltose transitions. As expected, we find that the dual MAL11 and MAL12 overexpression strain indeed shows a strongly reduced lag phase (Figure 3—figure supplements 4 and 5). In contrast, this is not the case when only one of the MAL genes is overexpressed (Figure 3—figure supplements 4 and 5).

It is important to note that our overexpression strains also still contain a copy of the MAL genes under control of their native promoter. Thus, to only observe the effect of overexpression, and remove the potential effect of protein inheritance of the other MAL gene expressed under its native promoter, we should consider the results after pre-growth on galactose (Figure 3—figure supplement 5). After galactose pre-growth, overexpression of MAL12 strongly increases lag time, while overexpressing MAL11 slightly reduces the lag time. This result is consistent with their roles in positive and negative feedback loops in the MAL regulatory network: the transporter Mal11p would increase the intracellular concentration of maltose, which acts as an inducer of the network, whereas overexpression of the maltase Mal12p lowers intracellular maltose concentrations by enzymatic breakdown.

Constitutively high levels of both Mal12p and Mal11p are sufficient to allow rapid resumption of growth after the shift to maltose (Figure 3—figure supplements 4 and 5). However, we also found that there is no correlation between lingering Mal11p and Mal12p proteins prior to a glucose-to-maltose shift in a wild-type strain (Figure 2). Therefore, we hypothesized that in the wild-type strain, at least one of these proteins is inherited in a non-functional form during glucose growth. Previous reports indeed suggest that Mal11 is rapidly internalized and inactivated after a shift from maltose to glucose (Görts, 1969; Horak and Wolf, 1997; Jiang et al., 1997; Lucero et al., 2000; Novak et al., 2004; Riballo et al., 1995).

To investigate this further, we measured HDB of the single MAL11 and MAL12 overexpression strains after pre-growth in maltose (Figure 3—figure supplement 4). We then see the effect of MAL overexpression of one gene and protein inheritance of the other gene expressed under its native promoter. If the natively expressed Mal protein is inherited in a functional form, it should be able to complement the other constitutively expressed Mal protein leading to a short lag time. We would actually expect the lag time to be particularly short after short glucose periods, when the inherited protein levels are still high. This is in fact the case for the MAL11 overexpression strain, where inheritance of native Mal12p elicits minimally short lag times after short glucose periods (Figure 3—figure supplement 4). However, for the MAL12 overexpression strain, there seems to be little to no effect of native Mal11 protein inheritance, even in a maltose-glucose-maltose transition where the glucose growth is limited to only 2 hr (Figure 3—figure supplement 4), suggesting that even if Mal11 proteins are present during glucose growth, they are not able to import maltose, most likely because they have been internalized.

In summary, Mal11p and Mal12p levels have the potential to strongly influence the lag time only if both are present at sufficiently high levels and in an active form. This requirement is not fulfilled in wild-type cells because only the maltase Mal12p is present at high enough concentrations and/or in an active form after glucose growth.

HDB depends on a growth-promoting factor
So far, our results show that the presence of high levels of both the Mal11 maltose transporter and Mal12 maltase are sufficient for cells to escape the lag phase. However, the results also show that Mal protein inheritance is not the cause of HDB during glucose-to-maltose shifts. A next set of experiments is therefore aimed at determining what is the actual cause of the HDB. HDB must be caused by at least one factor that gradually changes during glucose growth. This factor could be a promoting factor and enhance MAL gene induction and growth resumption, in which case its concentration would gradually diminish during growth in glucose. Alternatively, it could be a repressor and its concentration would increase during growth in glucose, thereby gradually increasing its repression of MAL gene induction and growth resumption.

To distinguish between these two scenarios, we measured the lag phase of diploid cells generated by mating haploid cells pre-grown in separate cultures (Figure 3—figure supplement 6). These two haploid cultures are mixed and grown in glucose for 4 hr, during which a fraction of the cells mate and form diploid cells. This mixed culture is transferred to maltose and the lag phase of the individual cells is scored. When the two parents are grown on the same pre-growth medium (either both in glucose or both in maltose), the resulting diploids and the haploid parental populations demonstrate the same lag behavior (Figure 3—figure supplement 6, top panels). Interestingly, when one parent has been pre-grown on maltose and the other parent is pre-grown on glucose, the resulting diploid demonstrates a lag similar to the parent pre-grown on maltose, and thus has a short lag phase. (Figure 3—figure supplement 6, bottom panels). This suggests that the diploid has received a high concentration of a growth-promoting factor from the parent that has been grown on maltose. In other words, this result suggests that the factor determining HDB in glucose-maltose shifts promotes growth resumption and is gradually reduced during glucose growth.

HDB in MAL gene induction is independent from nuclear-retained factors
Now that we have evidence to support the presence of growth-promoting factor(s) and that MAL gene induction is crucial for complete growth resumption, we investigated whether the events leading up to MAL gene induction are restricted to the nucleus or if they involve at least one cytoplasmic event. We performed a similar mating assay as the experiment described above with a slight alteration: one of the parents contains a kar1-1 allele, which allows for cytoplasmic fusion but prevents nuclear fusion during the mating process. Mating the kar1-1 parent with a KAR1-containing parent generates a heterokaryon instead of a regular diploid (Zacharioudakis et al., 2007). Both parents also contain a MAL12 allele fused to a differently colored fluorescent protein so we could measure the start of MAL gene induction in the two different parental nuclei. We found that the rate of MAL gene induction is not biased towards one of the two nuclei in the heterokaryon cells (Figure 3—figure supplement 7), indicating that the events leading up to MAL gene induction are not restricted to the nucleus, but must involve at least one cytoplasmic step. Importantly, this argues against the hypothesis that HDB is exclusively due to a transcriptionally poised chromatin structure at the MAL genes.

Genome-wide screen identifies distinct sets of genes that influence HDB
Our results thus far indicate that while MAL gene induction is needed for complete adaptation to maltose, HDB after a glucose-to-maltose shift cannot be ascribed to factors directly related to the MAL regulatory network. To unravel the mechanism underlying the HDB, we performed a genome-wide Bar-Seq screen to identify gene deletion mutants that demonstrate altered HDB (Figure 4). Bar-Seq experiments provide the ability to track growth characteristics of thousands of individual gene deletion mutants through the sequencing of unique barcodes present in each individual mutant (Robinson et al., 2014; Smith et al., 2009). The experimental set-up and growth of the pooled populations is shown in Figure 4—figure supplement 1 and described in the Materials and Methods section.

Figure 4 with 6 supplements Download asset Open asset
 
Barcode sequencing HDB dynamics in 3548 mutants.
(A) The black lines show the lag durations of all mutants for different times of pre-growth in glucose. The red lines indicate four types of mutants with (1) generally shorter lags, (2) generally … see more

https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.39234.022
Figure 4—figure supplement 6 Download asset Open asset
 
Validation of the BAR-Seq experiment.
Three genes whose knock-out shows long lag in the Bar-Seq experiment, were knocked out and tested for HDB with pre-growth in maltose, growth for different durations in glucose and shift to maltose. …  see more

https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.39234.028
Figure 4—figure supplement 5 Download asset Open asset
 
A physical interaction network for the genes identified having relatively short lags after short glucose periods, but long after long glucose periods.
The network includes DNA-protein (red lines), protein-protein (green lines) and phosphorylation (yellow lines) interactions.

https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.39234.027
Figure 4—figure supplement 4 Download asset Open asset
 
A physical interaction network for the genes identified as having relatively long lags after short glucose periods, and vice versa.
The network includes DNA-protein (red lines), protein-protein (green lines) and phosphorylation (yellow lines) interactions.

https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.39234.026
Figure 4—figure supplement 3 Download asset Open asset
 
Example visualization of HDB for one mutant.
When the lag time could be determined we plot a data point in the lower panel. Otherwise, we plot the fold increase during the maltose period in the top panel. The blue line indicates the time each …  see more

https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.39234.025
Figure 4—figure supplement 2 Download asset Open asset
 
Example of the growth rate and lag time analysis for one mutant.
Given the population growth and the frequency of each mutant at the start and end of the maltose period, we can plot how much each mutant has grown when the final sample was taken. Since the …  see more

https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.39234.024
Figure 4—figure supplement 1 Download asset Open asset
 
Experimental set-up of the Bar-Seq experiment.
The pool of gene deletion mutants adapted to maltose growth was transferred to glucose for different times (0, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12 hr) before switching back to maltose. Samples were taken at the …  see more

https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.39234.023
We characterized maltose-glucose-maltose HDB in 3548 gene deletion mutants. To represent the dynamics of HDB of mutants deleted for individual genes, we plotted the lag behavior after different times in glucose (Figure 4A and Figure 4—figure supplement 3). These graphs represent the HDB of each of the 3548 mutants. The procedure for calculating these lag times from read counts for each biological replicate is detailed as supplementary file 1. The graphs consist of an upper and a lower panel. When the lag time after a certain time in glucose could be quantified for a mutant, this lag time is plotted on the lower panel. If, however, we could not detect a clear escape within the timeframe of the experiment, we use the upper panel to plot the (small) relative change in cell density of the mutant during the lag phase. Using this approach, we identified four types of mutants based on their lag behavior (Figure 4A). Two large groups contain mutants that consistently show either a shorter or a longer lag phase compared to wild-type cells. The interaction networks for the genes of these two groups are shown in Figure 4B and C, respectively. A third category of mutants demonstrates a long lag time after short glucose periods, but average-to-short lags after long glucose periods. A fourth set of mutants show the opposite behavior compared to the third group, with short lags after short glucose periods and long lags after long glucose periods. The interaction networks for the genes of the latter two groups are shown in Figure 4—figure supplements 4 and 5.

In order to validate the results from the Bar-Seq, we investigated the effect of three genes, ATP5, COQ5 and QCR7, that were identified in the Bar-Seq experiment as determinants of lag duration and HDB (Figure 4—figure supplement 6). We therefore created three mutant cells lines, each lacking one of the three candidate genes. Similar to the setup of the Bar-Seq experiment, cultures were pre-grown in maltose, then shifted to glucose for different durations, and washed back to maltose and the population lag phase was measured. Consistent with the Bar-Seq, mutants in which one of these three genes was deleted have a longer lag phase compared to the wild-type.

Using gene ontology (GO) analysis, we identified functional enrichment in the four types of mutants. Deletion mutants with shorter lag phases are enriched for transcriptional regulation, the cytoplasmic ribosome, and histone deacetylation, suggesting that these mutants are defective in gene regulation associated with glucose repression (Figure 4B). More surprisingly, deletion mutants with longer lag phases are highly enriched for genes involved in respiration and mitochondrial function (Figure 4C). The long-then-short mutants contain members of the chromatin modifiers SAS- and SET1/COMPASS-complexes. The short-then-long mutants are enriched for de-novo purine biosynthesis and ESCRT-complexes that are involved in endocytosis (Figure 4—figure supplements 4 and 5).

Transcriptome analysis reveals regulation of genes involved in respiratory metabolism
To further dissect the molecular mechanisms underlying HDB, we used RNA-Seq to measure the transcriptional changes that occur during glucose growth and during the lag phase after the shift to maltose. We reasoned that genes that are downregulated during glucose growth and induced early during the lag phase after a shift to maltose might be important in determining lag phase length. The experimental set-up and the sampling scheme are shown in Figure 5A and are described in the Materials and Methods section. Expression values for biological replicates at each sampling point are provided as a supplementary files 2 and 3.

Figure 5 with 4 supplements Download asset Open asset
 
RNA-sequencing reveals cellular functions that are regulated during glucose and the lag phase.
(A) Experimental set-up of the RNA-Seq experiment. The wild-type strain adapted to maltose growth was transferred to glucose for different times (0, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12 hr) before switching it back … see more

https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.39234.029
Figure 5—figure supplement 4 Download asset Open asset
 
Correlation between protein and mRNA level changes during glucose growth after pre-growth on maltose.
The protein levels are measured using flow cytometry in strains with fluorescent protein fusion constructs. The mRNA is quantified as the number of transcripts mapped to the target gene per one …  see more

https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.39234.033
Figure 5—figure supplement 3 Download asset Open asset
 
Correlation between the lag behavior upon gene deletion (Bar-Seq), and the expression change of the corresponding genes during glucose growth (RNA-Seq).
The vertical axis shows the lag time and the horizontal axis shows the expression change during glucose growth. Both measures in the two axes show the results from the samples that have been growing …  see more

https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.39234.032
Figure 5—figure supplement 2 Download asset Open asset
 
Log2 expression changes during glucose growth for the genes that show large transcriptional changes between 1 hr and 12 hr after the shift to glucose Log2 expression of the genes highlighted in Figure 5—figure supplement 1 is shown between 1 hr and 12 hr after the shift to glucose.
The color codes are the same as in Figure 5—figure supplement 1.

https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.39234.031
Figure 5—figure supplement 1 Download asset Open asset
 
Detection of genes that show large transcriptional changes between 1 hr and 12 hr after the shift to glucose.
The slope of log2 gene expression changes versus time during glucose is plotted against the mean of these changes. All expression changes are relative to the initial sample taken during growth on …  see more

https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.39234.030
After sequencing, samples were compared with the maltose pre-growth condition to detect genes that were significantly up- or down-regulated relative to this condition. For each sample, GO enrichment was performed to link these genes to biological processes. Finally, we selected a set of non-redundant GO categories that were identified in at least three samples throughout the experiment (Figure 5B).

Perhaps not surprisingly, genes associated with growth, such as genes encoding elements of the translation machinery are up-regulated during glucose growth and repressed during the lag phase following a shift to maltose. Conversely, the MAL genes are repressed during glucose growth and induced during the lag phase following the shift to maltose. Interestingly, genes involved in respiration-related pathways, such as the TCA cycle and the electron transport chain, mirror MAL gene regulation: they are repressed during glucose growth and induced after the shift to maltose. Moreover, the induction of these respiration-linked genes actually precedes the induction of the MAL genes. Apart from these two large groups, we also identified specific processes that are uniquely up-regulated in glucose or after the shift to maltose. There is a strong induction of genes involved in iron metabolism at the end of glucose growth (Figure 5B and Figure 5—figure supplements 1 and 2) and processes such as endocytosis, autophagy and proteolysis are up-regulated after the shift to maltose (Figure 5B).

We were particularly interested in genes that demonstrated different changes in expression after short and long pre-growth in glucose as these are likely candidates to be involved in HDB. We compared the mean change in expression and the rate (slope) of change in expression and were able to identify genes for which the expression level changed significantly and gradually with increasing times of glucose growth (Figure 5—figure supplements 1 and 2). Interestingly, among the genes with a gradual repression during glucose (Figure 5—figure supplement 1, bottom left quadrant), we find HAP4, a central regulator of respiration (Lascaris et al., 2003; Lascaris et al., 2004), again hinting at a central role for respiration during the lag phase.

We compared the RNA-Seq results with the Bar-Seq results and asked whether genes that have a large effect on the lag time upon deletion show specific expression changes in glucose. In general, we find that genes that lead to a long lag when deleted tend to be repressed during glucose growth (repressed on average by 35%), whereas genes that lead to a shorter lag when deleted are on average slightly induced during glucose growth (induced on average by 10%) (Figure 5—figure supplement 3). Since we know that the factor determining HDB promotes escape from the lag and is reduced during glucose growth, this first category of repressed genes, which mainly contains genes linked to respiration, is likely linked to HDB.

In order to test to what extent the observed trends in mRNA levels hold true for protein levels, we compared the change in protein levels and the change in mRNA levels during glucose, growth after pre-growth in maltose, for a selected set of key genes and proteins (Figure 5—figure supplement 4). The protein levels were measured using flow cytometry on strains with genomically integrated fluorescent protein fusions. For this purpose, we chose six respiratory genes (CIT1, MDH1, KGD2, NDI1, SDH2 and COX6) alongside the MAL11 and MAL12 genes. The results show that in general, there is a good correlation between changes in mRNA levels and protein levels.

Levels of respiratory proteins correlate with population lag time
The combined results from our RNA-Seq and Bar-Seq screens suggest that genes involved in respiratory metabolism play a central role in the glucose-to-maltose transition. This is particularly interesting for S. cerevisiae as it is a Crabtree-positive yeast, meaning that glucose represses respiration in favor of fermentation even in the presence of oxygen. This behavior resembles the Warburg effect observed in mammalian tumors (Vander Heiden et al., 2009; Warburg, 1956).

We hypothesized that when cells are shifted from maltose to glucose, the cells reduce their respiratory metabolism, but do so gradually (Slavov et al., 2014). When cells are shifted from glucose to maltose, they need to re-induce respiration to continue growth. This implies that cells demonstrating higher respiration activity while growing on glucose would have shorter lag times upon a shift to maltose or galactose. We would therefore expect a negative correlation between the level of respiratory proteins in glucose and the lag time.

To test this hypothesis, we used flow cytometry to track the presence of a set of respiratory proteins during glucose growth after pre-growth in either maltose or galactose (Figure 6A). Moreover, we measured the level of these proteins during lag phase using fluorescence microscopy (Figure 6—figure supplement 1). We chose key proteins of the TCA cycle (Cit1p, Mdh1p and Kgd2p) and the electron transport chain (Ndi1p, Sdh2p and Cox6p). The expression levels of these proteins have been shown to correlate with the degree of respiration (Fendt and Sauer, 2010). Their levels correlate well with the population lag times, for pre-growth in maltose and also for pre-growth in galactose, suggesting that the link between respiration and lag duration is a general phenomenon (R² between 0.76 and 0.97) (Figure 6A). Moreover, in contrast to the correlation between population lag times and Mal protein levels (Figure 2E), the correlation between respiratory activity and lag times upon a switch to maltose holds after pre-growth in maltose, as well as after a pre-growth in galactose (Figure 6A. Also, consistent with the hypothesis that the ability to induce respiration decreases with residence time in glucose, we observe that the transcript levels of COX6 and CIT1 respiratory genes during lag phase is induced to its peak earlier in cells with shorter pre-growth in glucose (Figure 6—figure supplement 2).

Figure 6 with 3 supplements Download asset Open asset
 
Decrease of respiratory protein levels during glucose growth correlate with HDB.
(A) Population-level correlation between respiratory protein levels of Cit1-, Mdh1-, Kgd2-, Ndi1-, Sdh2- and Cox6-yECitrine and the lag time. Lag times and respiratory protein levels are correlated … see more

https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.39234.034
Figure 6—figure supplement 3 Download asset Open asset
 
Oxygen consumption during glucose growth and lag phase.
Percentage of dissolved oxygen in the media inoculated with strains with lower (cox6 Δ) and higher (HAP4OE) respiratory activity was compared against that of wild-type during glucose growth (top …  see more

https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.39234.037
Figure 6—figure supplement 2 Download asset Open asset
 
Induction of respiratory genes for different glucose pre-growth times.
Cells were pre-grown in maltose, switched to glucose for 4, 8 and 12 hr, and switched back to maltose again. Level of transcripts for each gene was quantified as number of the reads mapped to the …  see more

https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.39234.036
Figure 6—figure supplement 1 Download asset Open asset
 
Tracking respiratory gene induction during the lag phase.
Kymographs showing the evolution of (left) Cit1-, Mdh1-, Kgd2-, Ndi1-, Sdh2- and Cox6-yECitrine fluorescence and (right) the area of these tracked microcolonies. Cells were pre-grown in maltose, …  see more

https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.39234.035
If respiration is an important determinant of HDB, we would expect a clear link between gene expression dynamics and the escape from the lag phase after a shift from glucose to maltose. Using our microcolony tracking set-up (Figure 3A), we found that only microcolonies that induce these respiratory genes show substantial growth (Figure 6—figure supplement 1). Interestingly, the induction of these genes occurs around the same time as the start of the slow growth period observed within many microcolonies and precedes the induction of the MAL genes by several hours (Figure 3B and Figure 6—figure supplement 1). To better demonstrate this point, the induction of these respiratory proteins as well as MAL11 maltose transporter and MAL12 maltase during the lag phase was compared to the growth dynamics of the cells. The time-resolved cross-correlation between the growth rate and the protein expression was calculated for a range of time offsets (see (Kiviet et al., 2014) and Figure 6D). The cross-correlation for Mal11p and Mal12p peaks right after the cells resume growth. The correlation for Cit1p and Cox6p, however, peaks around 4 hr earlier and is stronger, indicating that expression of these respiratory proteins precedes escape from the lag phase, whereas, on average, expression of the maltose proteins only occurs around the time of escape.

Respiratory activity determines HDB
To investigate if respiratory activity directly affects the lag phase and HDB, we altered the cells’ respiratory capacity and measured HDB after a glucose-to-maltose shift. We used a chemical inhibitor of respiration (antimycin A) to decrease respiration as the cells transition from glucose to maltose. Furthermore, we examined a respiratory deficient mutant (cox6Δ). For both methods, altering the respiratory capacity led to substantially longer lag phases and a stronger increase in lag with extended pre-growth in glucose (Figure 6B). Conversely, to increase respiratory activity during glucose growth and the lag phase, we overexpressed the transcription factor HAP4 (Lascaris et al., 2003; Lascaris et al., 2004). On average, the HAP4 overexpression strain showed a two-fold decrease in lag duration and a much smaller increase in lag with extended pre-growth on glucose. This effect occurs both after pre-growth in maltose and pre-growth in galactose (Figure 6C). Measurement of dissolved oxygen during lag phase and glucose growth indeed confirms that HAP4 overexpression and respiratory deficient mutant (cox6Δ) strains consume oxygen at higher and lower rates respectively, compared to the wild-type (Figure 6—figure supplement 3).

At first sight, the effect of HAP4 overexpression on lag duration and HDB may appear similar to dual MAL11 and MAL12 overexpression, as both lead to reduced lag duration and a severe reduction in HDB. However, while activation of the M﻿AL genes is undoubtedly the final crucial step that allows cells to escape the lag phase, our results suggest that in contrast to what is often suggested, the induction of MAL genes is not the rate-limiting step and that inheritance of Mal proteins or MAL gene expression status does not explain HDB. Activation of respiration actually precedes MAL gene induction, and this activation of respiratory metabolism is the main rate-determining step. Together, these results show that the level of respiratory activity has a strong, direct influence on the duration of the lag time and the associated HDB.

Discussion
In this study, we used single-cell analyses and genome-wide screens to dissect the molecular mechanism underlying the HDB that affects lag phase length after a shift in carbon source. Our experiments show that cells pre-grown on maltose before being shifted to glucose and then back again to maltose show a lag phase that depends on the time the cells spent in glucose.

HDB is often implicitly suggested to be caused by changes in the dynamics of the de-repression of specific genes. This hypothesis is often based on a correlation between the induction of certain genes and the resumption of growth, for example in shifts from glucose to galactose. In this case, the HDB has been proposed to be due to Gal protein inheritance. In this work, we provide several lines of evidence indicating that HDB in maltose-glucose-maltose shifts depends neither on the first encounter with maltose nor on inheritance of Mal proteins. Instead, the HDB is linked to a previous exposure to any alternative carbon source that requires some degree of respiration, and consequently the gradual decline of respiratory activity during growth on glucose.

HDB does not depend on Mal protein inheritance. Firstly, intracellular Mal protein levels do not correlate with the population lag times across different pre-growth conditions. Specifically, we showed that the HDB that occurs when cells are shifted from glucose-to-maltose or glucose-to-galactose does not depend on a previous exposure to maltose or galactose, but rather on the time that the population was grown in glucose prior to the shift to the alternative carbon source (Figure 2A–F). Secondly, the variability in Mal protein levels within cells from one population does not explain the heterogeneity in lag duration between single cells (Figure 2G–I). Thirdly, only high levels of both functional maltase (Mal12p) and maltose transporter (Mal11p) can affect HDB (Figure 3—figure supplements 4 and 5). The activity or concentration of the transporter appears to be too low to influence the lag time, even after only 2 hr of growth in glucose. This observation agrees with previous reports that the maltose transporter is rapidly internalized by endocytosis and degraded in the vacuole in the presence of glucose (Görts, 1969; Horak and Wolf, 1997; Jiang et al., 1997; Lucero et al., 2000; Novak et al., 2004; Riballo et al., 1995). Fourthly, while expression of MAL genes is required for cells to resume fast exponential growth (Figure 3B,D and Figure 3—figure supplements 4 and 5), MAL gene induction does not seem to be the primary bottleneck determining lag phase duration and thus HDB. Tracking microcolony growth and gene expression after the glucose-maltose shift showed that cells that eventually induce the MAL genes, often show a transient, slow growth phase before they induce these genes (Figure 3B and Figure 3—figure supplements 1 and 2). Importantly, this slow growth is still observed in a mutant in which both the maltose transporter and the maltase genes were deleted (Figure 3D). Together, these results suggest MAL-independent processes that precede and possibly stimulate MAL gene induction.

To identify processes that could precede MAL gene activation and thereby determine HDB, we performed two genome-wide screens. This allowed us, for the first time, to obtain unparalleled insight into the molecular mechanisms underlying HDB. In both Bar-Seq and RNA-Seq experiments, genes involved in mitochondrial function and respiration demonstrated strong effects. Deletion mutants of genes involved in mitochondrial function and respiration showed longer lag times (Figure 4C). Moreover, the same genes were repressed during glucose growth (Figure 5—figure supplements 2 and 3; and Figure 6A). We confirmed that respiratory activity directly influences the lag phase by testing a respiratory deficient mutant as well as chemically inhibiting respiration, (Figure 6B and Figure 6—figure supplement 3) and on the other hand by increasing respiratory activity using HAP4 overexpression (Figure 6C and Figure 6—figure supplement 3; Lascaris et al., 2004). These experiments confirmed that changes in the respiratory activity cause changes in HDB. Specifically, reduced respiratory activity results in longer lag phases and over-activation of respiration yields shorter lag phases. Moreover, the slow growth observed in cells that just escaped the lag phase only occurs in microcolonies that induce respiratory proteins, with slow growth starting around the same time as respiratory gene induction, hours before MAL gene induction is observed (Figure 3B and Figure 6—figure supplement 1)

Our hypothesis that HDB is due to a gradual decrease in respiratory activity during glucose growth is consistent with a previous report demonstrating a gradual decrease of respiration over multiple generations in glucose (Slavov et al., 2014) as well as with a recent study showing the importance of respiration for a switch from glucose to other carbon sources (Perez-Samper et al., 2018). Our results from the mating and heterokaryon experiments are also consistent with this hypothesis. The mating experiment indicated that HDB is caused by a growth-promoting factor that is diluted during glucose growth. A caveat in the mating experiment is that after mating, the proteins uniquely present in each of the two cells are diluted two-fold which might render a repressor non-functional. However, this does not seem likely given the graded HDB for different glucose pre-growth times. The heterokaryon experiment showed that the rate of MAL gene induction is determined by at least a cytoplasmic process (Figure 3—figure supplements 6 and 7). The gradual decrease in respiratory activity could be either directly due to protein inheritance of respiratory proteins or complexes during glucose growth, and/or indirectly by the gradual change in an upstream factor determining respiratory activity independently of the respiratory protein levels. Our population-level lag times correlated well with respiratory protein levels, supporting the former hypothesis. Moreover, this could explain the observation that pre-growth in galactose leads to shorter lag times compared to pre-growth in maltose as the levels of respiratory proteins are higher in galactose than in maltose. (Figure 2A–B and Figure 6A).

Why would respiration play such an important role during the shift from glucose to alternative sugars? We hypothesize that upon the sudden loss of glucose, cells enter an energy-deficient state because they are not yet able to metabolize maltose. This energy-deficient state would be exacerbated by a decreased respiratory activity in response to glucose: respiration is a more energy-efficient pathway per carbon molecule compared to fermentation. Finally, this energy-deficient state likely prevents MAL gene induction and subsequent escape from the lag. In cells that successfully induce the MAL genes, it is unlikely that MAL gene expression is prevented by the complete depletion of factors that are required for protein expression (e.g. ATP). Indeed, in these cells, protein synthesis of other proteins occurs well before synthesis of Mal proteins. However, it is possible that for the majority of cells that never resume growth, protein expression is inhibited altogether by the depletion of necessary factors. Indeed, these cells show no sign of any protein synthesis (Figure 3B and Figure 6—figure supplement 1). An intriguing possibility is that in the cells that will eventually induce the MAL genes, MAL gene induction might be prevented until the cells have at least partly recovered from the dip in metabolic flux and ATP production before the energetically costly proton gradient over the cell membrane is used to support maltose import via the H+-maltose symporter (Serrano, 1977). The hypothesis that respiration is required for bridging the energy-deficient state during the lag phase is in agreement with the observation that lag phase in maltose is similar for cultures with pre-growth in maltose or galactose since respiration is active during growth on both sugars and repressed during glucose growth.

Previous investigations into HDB in carbon sources have not identified the general metabolic state as a central determinant. More commonly, such studies have noted inheritance of the corresponding metabolic proteins directly involved in either the uptake or processing of the alternative sugars (Kundu and Peterson, 2010; Stockwell and Rifkin, 2017; Zacharioudakis et al., 2007). Such studies, however, focused on the induction of the genes directly involved in alternative sugar metabolism without showing that induction of these genes is the rate-limiting step in adaptation, and without screening more broadly for processes that may precede and control induction of these genes. Although these studies revealed a correlation between residual Gal1p levels and the lag duration, they did not show that this correlation implied causation. It should, however, be noted that the experimental setups differ between studies, which may influence the main determinants of the duration of lag. Finally, the role of respiration in previously published omics expression studies on diauxic shifts (Murphy et al., 2015; Radonjic et al., 2005; Zampar et al., 2013), might have been masked by the fact that in their case the secondary carbon source (ethanol) can be solely utilized by respiration.

Our single-cell experiments, measuring lag time in maltose for cells that have experienced glucose repression for various durations, show that not only the lag time depends on glucose growth time, but also the fraction of cells resuming growth is as well dependent on the duration of previous exposure to glucose repression: upon shift to maltose after longer exposure to glucose, cells will have a longer lag phase and a smaller fraction of cells will manage to make the shift within the observed window of 24 hr. Considering the key role of respiration in the lag phase, one could speculate that after repression of respiration in glucose, some cells maintain some level of respiratory functionality while others do not. Such heterogeneity could be attributed to inheritance of a bistable positive feedback loops in regulation of respiration. Similar mechanism of inherited bistability is shown in the Lac operon of E. coli (Novick and Weiner, 1957; Ozbudak et al., 2004). Moreover, our results also show that although HDB is present in three different genetic backgrounds, the extent of the effect can vary greatly. We are currently dissecting the exact genetic differences that control the extent of HDB in natural yeast strains.

Our results reveal how slow transitions in central carbon metabolism cause transgenerational cellular HDB. This is not only interesting for our basic understanding of HDB, but also opens new routes in microbial biotechnology. One of the most common problems in industrial fermentations where complex substrates are used is that the microbes sometimes fail to switch between the different carbon sources and other nutrients in the medium, which leads to stuck or sluggish fermentations that cause important economic losses (Bisson and Butzke, 2000; Verstrepen et al., 2004). It will be interesting to see whether engineering strains, for example by overexpressing HAP4, can lead to more efficient fermentations.

In summary, our results demonstrate that HDB after a glucose-to-maltose shift does not only depend on the inheritance of Mal proteins required for the uptake and breakdown of maltose. Although activating the uptake and metabolism of alternative sugars is the last crucial step for cells to resume growth on a new carbon source, other processes precede this step and seem to be more important bottlenecks. Specifically, we find that during the switch from glucose to an alternative sugar such as maltose, cells need to activate respiratory metabolism. However, cells that have grown for extended times on glucose gradually repress respiration in favor of fermentation, and experience difficulties to re-activate respiratory metabolism, which results in much slower adaptation. We therefore conclude that HDB is not specific to a particular sugar. Instead, HDB is more general, with cells likely ‘remembering’ growing on any alternative carbon source that does not repress respiration as much as glucose does. It is tempting to speculate that similar slow transitions in metabolic states also govern HDB in other cell types, including some of the cases of nutritional programming observed in mammals. In fact, the genes identified in our genome-wide screen shows overlap with a recent screen for oxidative phosphorylation in human cells (Arroyo et al., 2016), which could provide a good basis to explore the role of these genes in metabolic programming in higher organisms.

It has been hypothesized that mitochondria evolved from a bacterial
ancestor that initially became established in an archaeal host cell as
an endosymbiont. Here we model this first stage of mitochondrial
evolution by engineering endosymbiosis between Escherichia coli
and Saccharomyces cerevisiae. An ADP/ATP translocase-expressing
E. coli provided ATP to a respiration-deficient cox2 yeast mutant and
enabled growth of a yeast–E. coli chimera on a nonfermentable
carbon source. In a reciprocal fashion, yeast provided thiamin to
an endosymbiotic E. coli thiamin auxotroph. Expression of several
SNARE-like proteins in E. coli was also required, likely to block lysosomal
degradation of intracellular bacteria. This chimeric system
was stable for more than 40 doublings, and GFP-expressing E. coli
endosymbionts could be observed in the yeast by fluorescence microscopy
and X-ray tomography. This readily manipulated system
should allow experimental delineation of host–endosymbiont adaptations
that occurred during evolution of the current, highly reduced
mitochondrial genome.
mitochondria | endosymbiotic theory | ADP/ATP translocase | evolution
Endosymbiotic theory suggests that mitochondria were once
free-living prokaryotes which entered the host cell and were
retained as endosymbionts (1–4). The earliest recognized instance
of endosymbiosis, which dramatically shaped the emergence of
present-day eukaryotic cells, occurred more than 1.5 billion years
ago (5). Previous studies hypothesized that an alphaproteobacterium
became established in an archaeal host cell as an endosymbiont
and triggered the evolution of the mitochondrion, an
organelle specialized for efficient energy production, particularly
ATP synthesis (3, 6). However, a recent study suggests that mitochondria
evolved from a proteobacterial lineage that branched
off before the divergence of all sampled alphaproteobacteria (7).
The recent discovery of the Asgard superphylum archaea, which
encode in their genomes homologs of cytoskeletal proteins and
vesicular trafficking machinery, indicates that the last archaeo–
eukaryotic common ancestor could have already featured precursors
to the endomembrane system of modern eukaryotes (8).
Significant details have emerged about the nature of the
premitochondrial endosymbiont. Studies involving the reconstruction
of its genome from endosymbiont genes retained in
eukaryotes and genes found in present-day alphaproteobacteria
point to a bacterium related to intracellular endosymbionts from
the Rickettsiales order (class of Alphaproteobacteria), some of
which are human and animal pathogens (9–11). This premitochondrial
endosymbiont likely possessed metabolic pathways
that included glycolysis, the tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA),
the pentose phosphate pathway, and the fatty acid biosynthesis
pathway. The reconstructed endosymbiont is also predicted to
have an electron transport chain capable of functioning under
low oxygen tension and an ADP/ATP translocase, the protein
functionally homologous to the one used by many intracellular
bacteria for ATP import from the host cytoplasm.
Herein, we attempted to experimentally recapitulate the early
stages of mitochondrial evolution by generating Escherichia coli
endosymbionts capable of providing ATP to host yeast cells
deficient in ATP synthesis. Such an experimental system with
easy-to-manipulate genomes may allow us to attempt evolution
of a bacterial endosymbiont with a minimal genome in yeast that
recapitulates key features of modern mitochondria.
Results
Experimental Approach. Our initial strategy involved engineering
E. coli strains that are auxotrophic for an essential cofactor and that
would depend on the host for this cofactor. We further engineered
the bacteria to express a functional ADP/ATP translocase and GFP
as a marker. As the host cells, we used Saccharomyces cerevisiae
strains that had mitochondrial defects and were deficient in utilizing
nonfermentable carbon sources (e.g., glycerol) for growth.
Introduction of such engineered E. coli cells into the mutant
S. cerevisiae cells followed by selection for yeast cells that can grow
on a nonfermentable carbon source for multiple generations was
expected to afford a stable yeast–E. coli chimera (Fig. 1).
Engineering an E. coli Strain Expressing Functional ADP/ATP Translocase.
We first engineered an E. coli DH10B strain that had key features of
an endosymbiont as outlined above. Because thiamin pyrophosphate
is an essential bacterial cofactor, deletion of thiamin biosynthetic
E. coli endosymbionts that could utilize glycerol for the synthesis of
ATP and provide it to the S. cerevisiae ρ0 host. However, we did
not observe formation of any yeast colonies after the yeast/E. coli
fusion mixtures were plated on a selection medium (rich medium
+ 3% glycerol, 0.1% glucose medium, 1 mM arabinose; selection
medium II).
Mitochondria of ρ0 yeast cells lack both the electron transport
chain and F1F0 ATP synthase (Atp6, Atp8, and Atp9 subunits
are encoded in mitochondrial DNA). As a result, the ρ0 yeast
cells energize their inner mitochondrial membrane inefficiently
by electrogenic exchange of mitochondrial ADP for cytosolic
ATP (catalyzed by the mitochondrial ADP/ATP translocase). To
sustain ADP/ATP exchange and maintain an energized inner
mitochondrial membrane, intramitochondrial ATP in the ρ0 cells
undergoes futile hydrolysis to ADP (18). We reasoned that such
an unproductive consumption of ATP by ρ0 mitochondria can
critically deplete cellular ATP in chimera cells and block their
growth. We therefore turned to a yeast mutant with a more
limited mitochondrial defect as a host, S. cerevisiae cox2-60
(NB97), which possesses mtDNA but has an insertion in the
COX2 gene. As a result, the cox2-60 strain lacks Cox2 protein,
does not assemble a functional cytochrome c oxidase complex
and, similar to ρ0 mutants, it does not grow in media with a
nonfermentable carbon source (19). However, F1F0 ATP synthase
expressed in mitochondria of the cox2-60 strain couples
hydrolysis of intramitochondrial ATP to proton transport across
the inner mitochondrial membrane resulting in more efficient
generation of the inner membrane electrochemical potential.
When S. cerevisiae cox2-60 spheroplasts were fused with the
engineered E. coli cells containing the pAM94 plasmid, a few
yeast colonies grew on the selection medium that had plated
yeast/E. coli fusion mixtures, but not on plates with control
mixtures that had omitted E. coli cells. However, most of the
colonies were E. coli. To suppress E. coli (a thiamin auxotroph)
growth, we also plated the fusion mixtures on a minimal selection
medium, but did not observe formation of any colonies, neither
yeast nor E. coli.
Introduction of Chlamydia SNARE Proteins into E. coli. Intracellular
pathogenic bacteria encode SNARE-like proteins that manipulate
the host vesicular trafficking machinery and allow the
pathogens to escape the lysosomal degradation pathway (20).
Multiple SNARE-like proteins are expressed by such intracellular
bacteria and are proposed to interfere with SNARE-mediated
membrane fusion processes (21, 22). While the establishment of
the alphaproteobacterial endosymbiont in the archaeal host could
predate the emergence of eukaryotic vesicular trafficking (11, 23),
successful engineering of endosymbiosis between present-day
eukaryotic cells and bacteria might depend on the expression of
SNARE-like proteins by experimental bacterial endosymbionts.
Initially, we transformed the E. coli ΔthiC::gfp-kanR strain with
pAM126 plasmid (SI Appendix, Fig. S4), which is derived from
pAM94, but also contains the incA gene encoding a SNARE-like
protein from the intracellular pathogen Chlamydia trachomatis
behind the pBAD promoter (19). IncA is thought to inhibit
endocytic SNARE-mediated fusion processes during the infectious
cycle of C. trachomatis. Fusions performed with this E. coli
strain and the S. cerevisiae cox2-60 mutant yielded again mostly E.
coli colonies on plates with selection medium II. Next, we incorporated
an additional SNARE-like gene, the incA homolog
from Chlamydia caviae, which is proposed to have a broader inhibitory
role than C. trachomatis incA (20, 24), into plasmid pAM126
to obtain pAM132 (SI Appendix, Fig. S4). Plasmid pAM132 was
transformed into E. coli ΔthiC::gfp-kanR cells, which were then
fused with the S. cerevisiae cox2-60 cells. This strategy resulted in
significantly more yeast colonies upon plating, although we still
observed formation of E. coli colonies as well. The yeast colonies
were replated on selection medium III (rich medium + 3%
glycerol + 1 mM arabinose) in the presence of carbenicillin
(50 mg/L) and continued to grow for five rounds of replating. A low
concentration of the antibiotic was added to eliminate the presence
of extracellular bacteria if any, while the intracellular bacteria
were expected to survive multiple rounds of replating on media
containing antibiotic due to the lower intracellular levels of the
carbenicillin in the yeast cytoplasm (25). We did not observe any
extracellular E. coli cells within such secondary colonies microscopically
(SI Appendix, Fig. S5A). Analysis of genomic DNA from
these yeast cells by PCR indicated the presence of both the yeast
and E. coli genomes; we were able to amplify the yeast MATa
mating gene specific to S. cerevisiae cox2-60 (SI Appendix, Fig.
S5B) and the gfp gene specific to the E. coli cells used in the fusion
(SI Appendix, Fig. S5C).
To generate more stable endosymbionts, we incorporated a
third SNARE-like gene from C. trachomatis, CT_813, into
plasmid pAM132 to afford pAM136 (SI Appendix, Fig. S4) and
transformed it into E. coli ΔthiC::gfp-kanR cells. CT_813 is proposed
to recruit ADP ribosylation factor GTPases and induce
rearrangement of microtubules and Golgi around the Chlamydia
inclusions (26). Fusions with S. cerevisiae cox2-60 cells again
yielded yeast colonies growing on nonfermentable growth medium,
but this time we did not observe E. coli colonies on the
plates. We replated the colonies for four consecutive rounds (3 d
per passage × 4 passages, >40 doublings) on selection medium
III plates in the presence of carbenicillin (Fig. 3A). We again
confirmed the presence of both yeast and E. coli genomes in the
cells from the colonies by PCR amplification of the MATa gene
for yeast and the gfp, 16S rDNA and glyA genes for E. coli (SI
Appendix, Fig. S6) and by qPCR (Fig. 3A). Finally, culturing the
yeast colonies from the fourth round of replating (SI Appendix,
Fig. S7A) in a glucose-rich medium (rich medium + 2% glucose,
a fermentative, nonselection medium) lacking carbenicillin produced
mixed S. cerevisiae and E. coli cultures with individual
E. coli cells being carbenicillin sensitive, kanamycin resistant, and
gfp positive (SI Appendix, Fig. S7 B and C). All these data
strongly suggest that the yeast colonies cultured on selection
medium III continued to harbor intracellular E. coli cells during
multiple rounds of replating. We also observed that intracellular
E. coli cells continued to propagate in yeast when chimeras were
grown on a less stringent selection medium II.
To investigate the expression of SNAREs in the engineered E.
coli cells, each of the SNAREs was C-terminally FLAG tagged.
The cells were lysed, and SNARE expression was analyzed by
Western blot. We observed the expression of C. trachomatis IncA
and CT_813, but not C. caviae IncA (SI Appendix, Fig. S11 A–D).
We also N-terminally FLAG-tagged C. caviae IncA, but still did
not observe its expression. Our inability to detect FLAG-tagged
C. caviae IncA could indicate that the protein is not expressed in
E. coli. Alternatively, considering that its inclusion enhanced the
stability of chimeras, it is possible that the N- and C-terminaltagged
IncA variants failed to express. To determine if the tagged
C. trachomatis IncA and CT_813 are present in the E. coli
membranes, we isolated the respective membrane fractions and
detected by Western blotting the presence of both C. trachomatis
IncA and CT_813 (SI Appendix, Fig. S11 E and F).
Next, we investigated the minimum number of SNAREs necessary
to establish endosymbiosis within the yeast cells. To this
end, we designed a construct, pAM162, which is similar to
pAM136, but lacks C. caviae incA, and transformed it into E. coli
ΔthiC::gfp-kanR and E. coli ΔnadA::gfp-kanR. Fusions with S.
cerevisiae cox2-60 cells again yielded yeast colonies growing on
nonfermentable growth medium. We replated these colonies for
three consecutive rounds on selection medium III plates in the
presence of carbenicillin (SI Appendix, Fig. S12A). We again
confirmed the presence of both yeast and E. coli genomes in the
cells from the colonies by PCR amplification of the MATa gene
for yeast and the gfp gene for E. coli (SI Appendix, Fig. S12B).
We further designed one other construct, pAM163, which is
similar to pAM162 but lacks C. trachomatis incA, and transformed
it into E. coli ΔthiC::gfp-kanR and E. coli ΔnadA::gfp-kanR
.
Fusions with S. cerevisiae cox2-60 cells yielded very few yeast
colonies on nonfermentable growth medium and poor growth
was observed on replating of these colonies on selection medium
III, similar to fusions with pAM126 (containing only C. trachomatis
incA SNARE). These studies indicated that a combination
of ADP/ATP translocase together with the two C. trachomatis
SNAREs is sufficient for establishing endosymbiosis. However,
given that the three-SNARE system afforded the most stable
endosymbionts, we further characterized this latter system, although
the nature by which C. caviae IncA affects endosymbiont
stability requires additional investigation.
Finally, to confirm that ADP/ATP translocase is required for
establishing endosymbiosis, we eliminated the ADP/ATP translocase
gene from pAM136 to afford pAM150 (SI Appendix, Fig.
S4). Plasmid pAM150 was transformed into E. coli ΔthiC::gfpkanR
cells and fusions with S. cerevisiae cox2-60 were plated on
selection medium II. This experiment yielded very few, slow
growing yeast colonies. These colonies were replated on selection
medium III, but no growth was observed for such yeast cells
highlighting a key role of ADP/ATP translocase in establishing
E. coli as an endosymbiont in S. cerevisiae cox2-60.
Significantly, and similar to the earlier yeast–E. coli chimera
versions, we observed slow chimera growth (∼6 h per doubling at
25 °C) with the E. coli symbionts harboring plasmid pAM136.
This observation could be due to several factors such as the rate
of ATP production by the E. coli endosymbiont, inefficient
partitioning of intracellular E. coli cells during yeast cell division,
overgrowth of the E. coli endosymbiont causing inhibition or
death of the host yeast, or depletion of metabolites from the
yeast cytoplasm by the E. coli endosymbiont.
Imaging E. coli Endosymbionts Within Yeast Cells by Fluorescence
Microscopy. To obtain further evidence for the presence of the
E. coli endosymbionts in yeast cells, we imaged the yeast cells
from a third round of replating with total internal reflection
fluorescence (TIRF) microscopy to detect the expression of the
bacteria-encoded GFP protein within the yeast cells. We observed
the presence of compartmentalized GFP-positive signals
in the fused yeast cells, but not in the parental control NB97
yeast cells (Fig. 4A). Similarly, cox2-60 S. cerevisiae–E. coli chimeras
and control S. cerevisiae were imaged by fluorescence
confocal microscopy. The S. cerevisiae cell wall was labeled with
FITC-labeled Con A (a lectin which binds to the yeast cell wall)
(27), and the E. coli endosymbionts were labeled with a EUB338-
Cy3 FISH probe, which can detect bacterial rRNA (28). We
detected FISH probe signals only in the yeast–E. coli chimera
cells, but not in control cells (Fig. 4B), further confirming the
presence of E. coli endosymbionts in yeast cells.
Mimicking Mitochondrial Genome Reduction with Additional E. coli
Auxotrophies. Having established the presence of E. coli endosymbionts
in yeast cells, we next investigated if we could begin to
replicate genome reduction events that occurred during mitochondrial
evolution. As a first step, we investigated if a strain of
E. coli auxotrophic for another key cofactor could generate endosymbionts
within yeast. We deleted the NAD biosynthetic
gene nadA by replacing it with the gfp-kanR gene cassette in E.
coli DH10B (to afford E. coli ΔnadA::gfp-kanR) and confirmed
that the resulting E. coli strain is a NAD auxotroph (growth in
media with NAD+ enabled by E. coli pnuC transporter) (29). We
then transformed this strain with the pAM136 plasmid (coding
for the ADP/ATP translocase and three SNARE-like proteins),
fused it with the S. cerevisiae cox2-60 spheroplasts, and plated the
fusion mixtures on selection medium II. As before, most of the
colonies that formed on the plates were yeast. We again confirmed
the presence of E. coli and yeast genomes by PCR (SI
Appendix, Fig. S8). These chimeras were also stable for four
rounds of replating (>40 generations, Fig. 3A) and displayed a
compartmentalized, E. coli-encoded GFP signal by TIRF microscopy
(Fig. 4A) as well as bacterial RNA FISH signal by
confocal fluorescence microscopy (Fig. 4B). We also assessed the
fraction of S. cerevisiae cox2-60–E. coli ΔnadA::gfp-kanR chimeric
cells present in the yeast culture grown on selection medium II.
We plated a single cell suspension of one such culture on plates
with nonselective (YPD + carbenicillin, allows growth of all yeast
cells) and selective (selection medium II + carbenicillin, allows
growth of chimeric cells only) media. We observed formation of
a comparable number of colonies on both media (Fig. 3B),
suggesting that most of yeast cells in the culture contained intracellular
E. coli. This conclusion was further confirmed by
detecting by PCR the E. coli gfp gene in 10 randomly selected
yeast colonies from selection medium II (Fig. 3C).
Next, we generated a thiamin/NAD double auxotroph of
E. coli DH10B, transformed it with pAM136, and used these
cells in fusions with yeast as before. Formation of yeast colonies
was again observed on selection plates (selection medium II) and
the chimeras could be replated for four rounds on the selection
medium III in the presence of carbenicillin (Fig. 3A). Additionally,
we observed the E. coli-encoded GFP signal in these
chimeric yeast cells by TIRF microscopy (Fig. 4A). Further, we
confirmed the presence of both genomes by PCR amplification
of the MATa gene for yeast and gfp and kanR genes for E. coli (SI
Appendix, Fig. S9). Finally, we transformed a serine auxotroph of
E. coli (E. coli ΔserA::kanR) with pAM136 plasmid and fused it
with the S. cerevisiae cox2-60 spheroplasts to select chimeras on
selection medium II, which were further replated on selection
medium III for three rounds of growth. The presence of E. coli
and yeast genomes was demonstrated by PCR during each round
of replating (SI Appendix, Fig. S10). These preliminary experiments
suggest that it might be relatively straightforward to
eliminate a significant fraction of the E. coli genome by complementing
essential bacterial metabolites and other cellular
building blocks with those from the yeast cytosol.
Imaging Chimera Cells by Soft X-Ray Tomography. To characterize
the S. cerevisiae–E. coli ΔnadA chimera at an ultrastructural
level, we imaged the chimera cells by soft X-ray tomography.
This technique is uniquely suited for high-resolution, quantitative
imaging of intact cells in near native state and allows imaging
and characterization of organelles and intracellular structures
(30). In addition to major yeast organelles, the imaged chimera
cell also contained an elongated subcellular structure that had a
relatively high X-ray linear absorption coefficient value (LAC =
0.41 μm−1
), suggesting high protein/lipid content (Fig. 5 and
Movie S1). Both the object shape and LAC value were similar to
those of freely growing E. coli cells (LAC = 0.49 μm−1
) imaged
by soft X-ray tomography (31). For comparison, we did not observe
any such subcellular structures in a S. cerevisiae cox2-60 cell
imaged by the same technique, although all major cell organelles
were clearly identified (SI Appendix, Fig. S13 and Movie S2).
Discussion
We have been able to generate E. coli endosymbionts that require
cofactors/amino acid from the host S. cerevisiae cytosol and
are capable of supplying ATP to the yeast. Another requirement
for establishing the S. cerevisiae–E. coli chimera is the expression
of SNARE-like proteins from intracellular pathogens, which are
likely required to avoid lysosomal degradation. Although the
detailed mechanism by which the SNARE-like proteins stabilize
the endosymbiont remains to be elucidated, their presence is
clearly required. Previous studies showed that C. trachomatis
IncA and C. caviae IncA inhibit membrane fusion driven by
endocytic SNAREs when included in v-SNARE (Syntaxin7/
Syntaxin8/Vti1b) or t-SNARE-containing (VAMP8) liposomes
(20). In addition, the SNARE VAMP8 has been shown to play a
role in maturation of the late endosomes in S. cerevisiae (32).
Therefore, it is possible that IncA may protect a membrane
compartment against lysosomal degradation by interfering with
yeast SNARE fusion function. CT_813 recruits ADP ribosylation
factor GTPases and induces rearrangement of microtubules and
Golgi around Chlamydia inclusions (26), processes which are
proposed to play an important role in establishment of the
replicative niche and may also play a role in establishing the
yeast–E. coli endosymbiont. Further studies are required to define
the precise roles of these SNARE-like proteins in establishing
a stable yeast endosymbiont, as well as their potential
relationship to the genetic elements that facilitated the establishment
of stable endosymbionts within archaeal hosts.
The growth of E. coli within the yeast cytosol is likely to facilitate
efforts to reduce the size of its genome. As a first step in this
direction, we showed that the endosymbiont can be manipulated
in terms of auxotrophy. It is likely that many other biosynthetic
pathways (e.g., amino acids, cofactors, and other metabolites) can
be eliminated from E. coli if endogenous or engineered bacterial
transporters allow their products to be taken up from the yeast
cytosol. Such biosynthetic pathways constitute a significant part of
the E. coli genome; for example, the genes encoding the NAD
biosynthetic pathway are ∼7 kb of chromosomal DNA, while the
transporter is encoded by only a 0.7-kb gene. This engineered
system should allow us to explore other aspects of the endosymbiotic
theory of organelle evolution, including those factors that
control the stability of symbionts with dramatically different replication
rates. Indeed, we have recently isolated a bacterial mutant
that is stable inside yeast cells for more than 120 d and are
characterizing this mutant by whole genome sequencing and gene
expression and metabolome analysis. Finally, it may be possible to
complement loss of additional genes from yeast mitochondria with
intracellular bacteria that supply additional functions beyond ATP
production.
This synthetic symbiont system described here also affords an
unexpected insight in mitochondrial evolution. Colonization of an
archaeal host by an intracellular bacterium utilizing an ADP/ATP
translocator for energy parasitism would likely be unfavorable for
the host archaeal cells growing in its natural ecological niche
(possibly rich in hydrogen) (33, 34). However, the orthogonal
features of the parasitic bacterium energy metabolism (e.g., generation
of ATP through TCA and oxygen-dependent oxidative
phosphorylation) together with its ADP/ATP translocase could
allow expansion of such colonized archaeal cells into new ecological
niches native to the endosymbiont (e.g., containing oxygen
and TCA substrate molecules), but prohibitive to nonparasitized
host cells. In the new niche, the tables are turned: the archaeal
host cell becomes the parasite (cannot produce its own ATP) and
the endosymbiotic bacterium becomes the prey as the direction of
the ATP flow is reversed (just like in our experimental system
where yeast is the parasite). Such ecological expansion of archaea
that harbored a parasitic endosymbiont expressing an ADP/ATP
translocase could be the first step in evolutionary transition from
premitochondrial endosymbiont to protomitochondrion.
Robust methods for detecting convergent shifts in evolutionary
rates
Raghavendran Partha1
, Amanda Kowalczyk1
, Nathan Clark1
, Maria Chikina1
1 Department of Computational and Systems Biology, University of Pittsburgh, PA,
USA
Corresponding author: Maria Chikina; mchikina@pitt.edu
Abstract
Identifying genomic elements underlying phenotypic adaptations is an important
problem in evolutionary biology. Comparative analyses learning from convergent
evolution of traits are gaining momentum in accurately detecting such elements. We
previously developed a method for predicting phenotypic associations of genetic
elements by contrasting patterns of sequence evolution in species showing a
phenotype with those that do not. Using this method, we successfully demonstrated
convergent evolutionary rate shifts in genetic elements associated with two
phenotypic adaptations, namely the independent subterranean and marine
transitions of terrestrial mammalian lineages. Our method calculates gene-specific
rates of evolution on branches of phylogenetic trees using linear regression. These
rates represent the extent of sequence divergence on a branch after removing the
expected divergence on the branch due to background factors. The rates calculated
using this regression analysis exhibit an important statistical limitation, namely
heteroscedasticity. We observe that the rates on branches that are longer on
average show higher variance, and describe how this problem adversely affects the
confidence with which we can make inferences about rate shifts. Using a
combination of data transformation and weighted regression, we have developed an
updated method that corrects this heteroscedasticity in the rates. We additionally
illustrate the improved performance offered by the updated method at robust
detection of convergent rate shifts in phylogenetic trees of protein-coding genes
across mammals, as well as using simulated tree datasets. Overall, we present an
important extension to our evolutionary-rates-based method that performs more
robustly and consistently at detecting convergent shifts in evolutionary rates.
Introduction
Understanding the relationship between phenotype and genotype is one of
the fundamental problems of biology. A mechanistic characterization of this
relationship hinges on our ability to define how specific genetic elements contribute
to biological processes at the molecular, cellular, and organismal level. Advanced
high-throughput sequencing technologies have enabled the development of
experimental approaches that have discovered a wealth of genetic elements with
putative regulatory roles across tissues (ENCODE Project Consortium, 2012;
Andersson et al., 2014; Romanoski et al., 2015). However, identifying the precise
biological functions of these discovered elements remains a challenge. Even beyond
non-coding elements, the precise biological roles of many protein-coding genes is
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Oct. 30, 2018; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/457309. The copyright holder for this preprint
still poorly understood and many genes with statistical disease associations still lack
a mechanistic explanation (Pennacchio et al., 2013; Radivojac et al., 2013; Sa,
Sánchez and Huarte, 2013; Shlyueva, Stampfel and Stark, 2014). While
experimental validation for functional annotation remains challenging, there is
considerable interest in developing new tools that can use existing data resources to
further elucidate the function of genetic elements. These approaches have the
potential to improve the diagnosis of disease susceptibility as well as the
development of therapeutic interventions (Manolio et al., 2009; Esteller, 2011).
Computational approaches learning from patterns of convergent phenotypic
evolution across species provide a complementary approach to predict genotypephenotype
associations. The natural world is rife with examples of phenotypic
convergence ranging from the independent evolution of flight in birds and mammals
to diving in species that transitioned from a terrestrial to marine habitat to loss of
complex phenotypes such as eyesight in animals colonizing the subterranean niche.
Genome-scale studies aimed at identifying the genetic basis of phenotypic
convergence take advantage of the growing availability of whole genome sequences
for species across several orders, alongside the development of comparative
methods to predict orthologous sequences (Eisen, 1998; Pellegrini et al., 1999; Li et
al., 2014). An oft considered approach by such studies is to identify convergence at
the molecular level, including substitutions at specific nucleotide or amino acid sites
(Zhang and Kumar, 1997; Parker et al., 2013; Stern, 2013; Foote et al., 2015;
Thomas and Hahn, 2015; Zou and Zhang, 2015). A complementary strategy to
investigate the genetic basis of convergence is to search for convergent changes at
the level of larger functional regions rather than specific nucleotide or amino acid
sites. Sets of genes associated with a phenotype can respond to convergent
changes in the selective pressure on the phenotype through non-identical changes in
the same gene, and as such, sites-based methods can fail to detect them. These
limitations have encouraged researchers to search for convergent shifts in
evolutionary rates of individual protein-coding genes and more recently conserved
non-coding elements (Lartillot and Poujol, 2011; Hiller et al., 2012; Chikina,
Robinson and Clark, 2016; Marcovitz, Jia and Bejerano, 2016; Prudent et al., 2016).
An increased selective constraint can manifest as a slower evolutionary rate
whereas faster evolutionary rates can result from a release of constraint or from
adaptation. Thus phenotypic associations for genetic elements can be predicted from
correlated changes in their evolutionary rates on phylogenetic branches
corresponding to the phenotypic change. Example approaches based on
evolutionary rates include the Forward/Reverse Genomics methods that have
identified protein-coding and non-coding genetic elements showing convergent
regression in subterranean mammals, as well as limb-regulatory elements lost in
snake lineages (Hiller et al., 2012; Marcovitz, Jia and Bejerano, 2016; Prudent et al.,
2016; Roscito et al., 2017).
We previously developed an evolutionary-rates-based method to identify
genetic elements showing convergent shifts in evolutionary rates associated with two
distinct phenotypic transitions (Chikina, Robinson and Clark, 2016; Partha et al.,
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Oct. 30, 2018; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/457309. The copyright holder for this preprint
2017). Our method calculates gene-specific evolutionary rates using a linear model,
and gene-trait associations are inferred using correlations of these rates with the
phenotype of interest. A genome-wide scan for protein-coding genes associated with
the transition to the marine environment identified hundreds of genes that showed
accelerated evolutionary rates on three marine mammal lineages (Chikina, Robinson
and Clark, 2016). These accelerated genes were significantly enriched for functional
roles in pathways important for the marine adaptation including muscle physiology,
sensory systems and lipid metabolism. More recently, using our methods we
detected an excess of vision-specific genes as well as enhancers that showed
convergent rate acceleration on the branches corresponding to four subterranean
mammals (Partha et al., 2017). Such genome-scale efforts, both from our group and
others, searching for genetic elements responding to convergent changes in the
selective pressures in their environment, are gaining momentum in accurately
describing precise genotype-phenotype associations.
Our current evolutionary-rates method has an important statistical limitation,
namely strong mean-variance trends in the computed evolutionary rates. The
distributions of branch lengths of gene trees in phylogenetic datasets are influenced
by the choice of species, divergence from the most recent common ancestor, and
species-specific properties such as generation time in addition to gene-specific
constraints on the sequence evolution. These factors cause large differences in the
average lengths as well as the variance of the branch lengths across the branches
studied. In this paper, we illustrate how this limitation can adversely impact the
confidence with which we infer phenotypic associations for genetic elements, in
particular making them sensitive to certain factors in phylogenomic analyses
including choice of taxonomic groups and average rates of sequence divergence on
phylogenetic branches showing the convergent phenotype. We demonstrate how
introducing long branches in phylogenetic trees via the inclusion of distantly related
species impacts the reliable estimation of evolutionary rates using gene trees across
mammals, as well using a first-of-its-kind model for simulating gene trees. We
present key improvements to our methods that address these limitations and
overcome them. The next section New Approaches presents a detailed walk-through
of our current approach to calculate relative evolutionary rates, the illustration of
mean-variance trends (heteroscedasticity) in these rates, and our methodological
updates that correct for the problem of heteroscedasticity in the rates. We
subsequently demonstrate the improved reliability in relative rate calculations using
our updated method, and more importantly in the robust detection of convergent rate
shifts across a range of evolutionary scenarios in real and simulated phylogenetic
datasets.
New Approaches
Current relative-evolutionary-rates methods for predicting phenotypic
associations of genetic elements
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Oct. 30, 2018; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/457309. The copyright holder for this preprint
Our method infers genetic elements associated with a convergent phenotype
of interest based on correlations between that phenotype and the rates of evolution
of genetic elements. As input, the phenotype is encoded as a binary trait on a
phylogenetic tree, and the evolution of each genetic element is similarly described by
phylogenetic trees with the same fixed topology. Figure 1 provides an illustration of
our method capturing the convergent acceleration of the Lens Intrinsic membrane 2
protein Lim2 on four subterranean mammal branches. We use maximum likelihood
approaches to estimate the amount of sequence divergence of each genetic element
on branches of the phylogenetic tree (Yang, 2007). Using the branch lengths on
each elements tree's branch lengths, we calculate the average tree across the
individual trees reflecting the expected amount of divergence on each branch.
Relative evolutionary rates (RERs) on individual trees are then calculated as the
residuals of a linear regression analysis where the dependent variable corresponds
to the branch lengths of individual trees, and the independent variable corresponds
to branch lengths of the average tree. Thus the relative rates reflect the genespecific
rate of divergence in each branch, factoring out the expected divergence on
the branch due to genome-wide effects (such as mutation rate, time since speciation,
etc.). The relative rates method works downstream of estimating the trees, and
hence considers protein-coding gene trees, non-coding genetic element trees and
simulated gene trees equivalently. For the sake of simplicity, we refer to the relative
rates on the branches of each tree as the gene-specific relative rate; the term gene
could in principle be referring to a protein-coding gene, non-coding genetic element,
or a simulated tree depending on the dataset being studied.
Figure 1. Predicting gene-trait associations using relative rates methods. A. Lens
Intrinsic Membrane 2 (Lim2) protein-coding gene tree. Our phylogenetic dataset is
comprised of trees constructed from alignments of protein-coding genes in the mammalian
genome across 59 species of placental mammals. B. Relative rates on branches of
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Oct. 30, 2018; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/457309. The copyright holder for this preprint
phylogenetic trees are calculated using linear regression. C. Gene-trait associations are
identified using correlations of relative rates of the gene with binary trait of interest
Estimating mean-variance trends in relative rates
Our current methods calculate the gene-specific rates by correcting for the
genome-wide effects on branch lengths using linear regression. Consequently, the
variance of the relative rates on individual branches strongly depends on the
average length of the branch, illustrated here using an example protein-coding gene
tree for MFNG, Manic Fringe Homolog Drosophila (Figure 2A). We see that longer
branches have relative rates showing a higher variance, as can be inferred from the
increasing spread of the relative rates. This pattern becomes clearer when we plot
the genome-wide variance in relative rates for branches of different average lengths
(Figure 2B). In statistical terms, the relative rates are heteroscedastic meaning they
show unequal variance across the range of values of the dependent variable, here
the average branch length. The presence of a non-constant mean-variance trend in
the residuals stands in violation of one of the assumptions underlying linear
regression, namely, homoscedasticity or constant variance of residuals with respect
to the dependent variable. More importantly, we suspect that this heteroscedasticity
of the relative rates adversely affects the confidence with which we can infer rate
shifts on specific branches. For example, the presence of a mean-variance trend can
increase the likelihood of observing higher relative rates on longer branches by
chance, rather than due to gene-specific changes reflecting changes in selective
pressure. A potential negative consequence could be a higher proportion of false
positives while inferring convergent rate changes on such branches.
Figure 2. Heteroscedasticity in the relative rates computed using current method. A.
Relative rates on branches of Manic Fringe (MFNG) gene tree, calculated using current
method. Points represent branches of the gene tree, with relative rates computed on the
branches plotted against the genome-wide average length. Heteroscedasticity in the relative
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Oct. 30, 2018; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/457309. The copyright holder for this preprint
rates can be visualized as the increase in the variance of the relative rates with increasing
average branch length B. Genome-wide mean-variance trends in relative rates. The
logarithm of the relative rate variance within each bin is shown, where branches are binned
based on their average lengths across all gene trees. Bin ranges were chosen to provide
equal numbers of observations per bin. Higher variance in relative rates are observed with
increasing branch lengths, and the extent of this heteroscedasticity is calculated using the ‘rsquared’
of the quadratic model between the variables plotted.
Updated method to calculate relative rates
In this study, we present an approach relying on a combination of data
transformation and weighted linear regression to calculate relative evolutionary rates
that addresses the statistical limitations resulting from relative rates calculated using
naive linear regression. The proposed method updates are based on the ideas
presented in Law et al, who developed new linear modeling strategies to handle
issues related to mean-variance relationship of log-counts in RNA-seq reads (Law et
al., 2014; Ritchie et al., 2015). We represent the branch lengths on individual gene
trees as a matrix Y, where rows correspond to individual genes (g), and columns to
the branches (b) on these trees. We first transform the branch length data using a
square-root transformation (Eq. 1).
𝑌𝑔𝑏
′ = √𝑌𝑔𝑏 (1)
Following the transformation, we perform a weighted regression analysis to
calculate the relative evolutionary rates as follows: we calculate the average tree and
perform a first-pass of linear regression using the transformed branch length matrix
(Eq. 3,4).
𝑥𝑏 = 𝑌̅
𝑏
′
, (2)
where 𝑥𝑏 is the branch length for branch b in the average tree.
𝛽̂ = (𝑋
𝑇𝑋)
−1𝑋
𝑇𝑌
′
(3)
𝑅 = 𝑌
′ − 𝑋𝛽̂, (4)
where 𝛽̂ are the coefficients of linear regression, and R is the residuals matrix.
We then estimate the mean-variance trends in the residuals of the linear
regression analysis by empirically fitting a locally weighted scatterplot smoothing
(LOWESS) function capturing the relationship between the log of variance of the
residuals and the branch lengths (Eq. 5).
𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑅
2
) ~𝑓(𝑌
′
) (5)
Subsequent to estimating this function, we assign each gene x branch
observation a weight W based on the predicted value for the branch, obtained from
the first pass linear regression (Eq. 6).
𝑊 = 𝑒
−𝑓(𝑋𝛽̂)
(6)
For branches that are shorter on average, the variance in the residuals is
smaller, thus resulting in a higher weight, and vice versa. Using the computed
weights, we perform a weighted regression analysis between the individual branch
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Oct. 30, 2018; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/457309. The copyright holder for this preprint
length (dependent variable) and the average tree (independent variable). The
weighted regression analysis attempts to remove the heteroscedasticity in the
residuals by computing the residuals after minimizing the weighted sum of squared
errors, as opposed to the raw sum of squared errors (Eq. 7,8).
𝛽̂𝑊𝐿𝑆 = (𝑋
𝑇𝑊𝑋)
−1𝑋
𝑇𝑊𝑌
′
(7)
𝑅 = 𝑌
′ − 𝑋𝛽̂𝑊𝐿𝑆 (8)
𝑟𝑔𝑏
′ =
𝑟𝑔𝑏√𝑤𝑔𝑏
𝜎𝑏
, (9)
where 𝜎𝑏 is the standard deviation of the weighted residuals in branch b
Subsequent to the weighted regression analysis, the weighted residuals (𝑟𝑔𝑏
′
),
are estimated by rescaling the regression residuals (𝑟𝑔𝑏) with the weights,
additionally standardized to have unit variance within every branch across all genes
(Eq. 9). The weighted residuals (𝑟𝑔𝑏
′
) correspond to the weighted relative rate on
branch b for gene g. The differences to the relative rate calculations introduced by
the updated method result in changes to the scales of the relative rates computed.
However, we note that this scale is arbitrary and the downstream gene-trait
correlations for binary traits estimated using a Mann-Whitney test (see Methods)
depend only on the ranks of the relative rates of each branch within any single gene
tree. Figure 3 shows the workflows for computing relative evolutionary rates using
the original and updated method.
Figure 3. Workflow for calculating relative evolutionary rates using the updated
method. Black areas of the workflow represent steps implemented as part of current relative
rates method, and blue areas correspond to methodological updates.
Results
Improvements to relative evolutionary rates methods mitigate genome-wide
mean-variance relationship
Our updated method to calculate relative rates using data transformation
followed by weighted regression produce nearly homoscedastic relative rates that do
not show a significant global mean-variance relationship. Figure 4A shows the
relative rates computed for the MFNG protein-coding gene tree using the updated
method. In comparison to the original method based on naive linear regression
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Oct. 30, 2018; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/457309. The copyright holder for this preprint
(Figure 2A), we observe that the updated method produces relative rates showing no
apparent increase in the variance of relative rates on longer branches of the tree.
Plotting the genome-wide mean-variance trends of the relative rates, we observe
that the relative rates calculated from transformed-weighted residuals show nearly
constant variance across branches of varying lengths (Figure 4B). We additionally
checked the mean-variance relationships from intermediate steps in our method that
can estimate relative rates, corresponding to two method variants which do not
implement data transformation (linear-weighted regime) or a weighted regression
(square-root unweighted regime) (Supplementary Figure S1). However, we find that
the intermediate regimes, utilizing only one of the method updates (branch length
transformation or weighted regression) are less effective at eliminating meanvariance
trends. A combination of transformation and weighted regression steps
works best at producing homoscedastic relative rates.
Figure 4. Updated method to calculate relative rates shows no apparent trends of
heteroscedasticity. A. Manic Fringe (MFNG) gene relative rates calculated using the
updated method. In comparison to figure 2A, we do not observe an increase in the variance
of relative rates of branches with increasing average branch length. B. Genome-wide meanvariance
trends for relative rates computed using the updated method show constant
variance with increasing branch lengths. Contrasting the trends resulting from the application
of original (Figure 2B) and updated method (Figure 4B), we observe that the updated
method produces nearly homoscedastic relative rates. The extent of heteroscedasticity,
computed as the ‘r-squared’ of the quadratic model between the variables plotted, is nearly
hundred-fold lower with the updated method compared to original method.
Better robustness to inclusion of distantly related species
In earlier applications of our evolutionary-rates-based method to detect
genetic elements convergently responding in subterranean mammals and marine
mammals respectively, we sampled alignments of placental mammal species to
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Oct. 30, 2018; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/457309. The copyright holder for this preprint
construct phylogenetic trees for each genetic element (Chikina, Robinson and Clark,
2016; Partha et al., 2017). These alignments were derived from the placental
mammal subset of the 100-way vertebrate alignments made publicly available by the
UCSC genome browser (Casper et al., 2018). In addition to these placental
mammals, the 100-way alignments include four other species of mammals, three
marsupials – Opossum (monDom5), Wallaby (macEug2), Tasmanian Devil
(sarHar1), and one monotreme – Platypus (ornAna1). Despite deep conservation of
many genetic elements in these non-placental mammals, human-and-mouse
centered phylogenomic studies tend to exclude these species due to the introduction
of long branches in the phylogenetic trees (Parker et al., 2013; Marcovitz, Jia and
Bejerano, 2016; Prudent et al., 2016). For instance, in previous applications of our
relative-rates-methods we deliberately excluded these non-placental mammals since
they produce wide variations in relative rates due to the introduction of long
branches, which would adversely affect the confidence with which we make
inferences of convergent rate acceleration in species exhibiting a convergent
phenotype (Chikina, Robinson and Clark, 2016; Partha et al., 2017). However,
scanning for rate-trait associations across tree datasets with higher numbers of
species would allow for more statistical power, and hence a relative rates method
that can reliably include such distantly related species offers a clear advantage. To
this end, we test the robustness of our updated method to the inclusion of distantly
related species at inferring convergent rate shifts. We choose two phylogenetic
datasets - 1. Genome-wide protein-coding gene alignments across 59 placental
mammal species, and 2. across 63 mammals including the four non-placental
mammals in addition to the placentals. An example demonstration of how our
current method to calculate relative rates is sensitive to the inclusion of non-placental
mammals is illustrated in Figure 5A. Using the example Peropsin (RRH) gene, we
show that the ranks of relative rates computed using the current method
considerable vary upon the inclusion of non-placental mammals. These changes in
ranks are observed across many branches on the gene tree including one of the four
subterranean branches (Cape golden mole). In comparison, the updated method
displays a stronger concordance in the ranks of the computed relative rates (Figure
5A). Consequently, the subterranean acceleration scores for RRH computed using
the updated method are more stable with the inclusion of non-placental mammals
(Table 1).
Dataset\Method Original Updated
With non-placentals 2.70(rho = 0.31;
 p = 0.002)
2.1(rho = 0.27;
 p = 0.008)
Placentals only 1.38(rho = 0.21;
 p = 0.041)
2.0(rho = 0.26;
 p = 0.01)
Table 1. Subterranean acceleration scores for Peropsin (RRH) computed using two
methods, and across two datasets. In comparison to the original method, the updated
method shows stronger consistency in the scores across the two tree datasets, with and
without the non-placental mammals. The subterranean acceleration scores reflect the
significance of convergent rate acceleration on the four subterranean branches.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Oct. 30, 2018; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/457309. The copyright holder for this preprint
We also performed a larger-scale benchmarking of the robustness of our
methods to the inclusion of non-placental mammals across 60 genes showing eyespecific
expression. These genes were identified based on mouse microarray
expression data across 91 tissues (see Methods). For each of these eye-specific
genes, we calculated subterranean acceleration scores (see Methods) reflecting the
convergent rate acceleration on the four subterranean branches, independently in
gene trees including and excluding the non-placental mammals. Based on the
relative rates calculated using each method, we compared the concordance of the
subterranean acceleration scores across the two tree datasets. Ideally, we expect
the scores produced by the methods to be highly consistent across the two datasets
since the four non-placental mammals are not subterranean by nature, with only
minor differences arising due to the inclusion of four additional background species.
The results of the analysis revealed that the updated method produces superior
concordance in the scores across the two tree datasets, reflecting its improved ability
to handle the long branches introduced by the non-placental mammals, (Fig 5B).
Figure 5. Comparison of robustness of methods to inclusion of non-placental
mammals. A. Relative rates of Peropsin (RRH) gene across trees with and without nonplacental
mammals, using the original vs the updated method. The relative rate ranks of
terminal lineage branches within the RRH tree are plotted with respect to the inclusion of
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Oct. 30, 2018; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/457309. The copyright holder for this preprint
non-placental mammals in the gene trees. Red points denote subterranean branches, and
blue points correspond to non-placental mammals. Ranks of relative rates on computed by
the original method form a crisscross pattern reflecting wider variation with respect to the
inclusion of non-placental mammals, whereas updated methods reveal stronger
concordance. B. Updated method shows improved robustness to inclusion of non-placental
mammals at detecting subterranean acceleration of eye-specific genes. Individual points
represent rate acceleration on subterranean branches for each of sixty eye-specific genes
computed across two datasets using the two methods. Robustness of each method is
estimated as the spearman correlation coefficient of subterranean acceleration scores
computed based on placental-only gene trees (y-axis) and scores computed based on trees
also including non-placental mammals. An improved robustness to the inclusion of nonplacental
mammals is observed with the updated method.
Improved power to detect convergent rate shifts in simulated trees
In order to compare the power of our methods to detect convergent rate shifts
in branches across a range of evolutionary scenarios, we developed a model to
simulate individual gene trees. Such a model allows us to rigorously examine
method performance in relation to various parameters in phylogenetic datasets
including number of foreground branches, length distribution of foreground branches
etc., where foreground branches describe branches showing a convergent
phenotype, while background branches do not. The limited availability of ‘ground
truth’ examples of convergently evolving genetic elements calls for the development
of biologically realistic simulations of sequence evolution. Using our model to
simulate trees (see Methods), we compared the power to detect rate shifts in relation
to two factors: 1. Average lengths of foreground branches, in particular extreme
foreground branches - branches that are short and long on average, respectively. 2.
Number of foreground branches. We investigated the performance of the updated
method in detecting rate shifts in such extreme branches, assessing the power
advantage resulting from calculating relative rates that do not suffer from a biased
mean-variance relationship.
Our model to simulate phylogenetic trees allows for explicit control over
choosing foreground branches showing convergent rate acceleration. We simulate
‘control’ trees, where all branches are modeled to evolve at their respective average
rates, and ‘positive’ trees, where the chosen foreground branches are modeled to
evolve at an accelerated rate that is twice their average rate (see Methods). Firstly,
we compared the heteroscedasticity in the relative rates on the branches of the
control trees calculated using the original and updated methods. Similar to the trends
observed in mammalian gene trees (Supplementary figure S1), we observed that the
updated method outperformed the original method at producing homoscedastic
relative rates (Supplementary figure S3). We then calculated a foreground
acceleration score for individual simulated trees (see Methods). This score,
calculated a signed negative logarithm of the p-value, is higher for trees showing
stronger convergent rate acceleration on the foreground branches. Subsequent to
estimating these scores, we evaluated the performance of the two methods, based
on the power to distinguish the positive trees as showing convergent acceleration in
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Oct. 30, 2018; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/457309. The copyright holder for this preprint
comparison to the control trees. In two independent simulation settings with
foreground branches of long and short average lengths respectively, we observed
that the updated method offers more power to detect convergently accelerated
‘positive’ trees (Figure 6B). In addition to the positive trees with foreground branches
that were long or short branches, we compared the power to detect rate acceleration
on foreground branches of intermediate length. Consistent with the findings in
short/long foregrounds, we find a modest yet significant improvement offered by the
updated method (Supplementary figure S4). Overall, we find that our updated
method to compute relative rates offers a significantly improved power to detect
convergent rate shifts in simulated trees.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Oct. 30, 2018; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/457309. The copyright holder for this preprint
Figure 6. Comparison of method performance across simulated phylogenetic trees. A.
Branch length distributions for simulating phylogenetic trees with foreground branches
highlighted in red. Two independent simulations were performed with foreground branch sets
comprised of long foreground branches (left panel) and short foreground branches (right
panel) respectively. B. Power to detect rate shift in foreground branches of simulated trees.
Across five independent simulations of control trees and positive trees, we measured the
area under the precision-recall curve (AUPR) to precisely detect positive trees using the
foreground acceleration score. The AUPR distributions obtained using the updated method
to calculate relative rates are significantly elevated compared to the original method across
simulated scenarios involving foreground sets of long (left) and short branches (right)
respectively.
We then compared the power to detect rate shifts across varying numbers of
foreground branches by simulating ‘positive’ trees with seven foreground branches of
short average lengths (Supplementary figure S5). We subsequently generated
positive trees with subsets of n branches (n ranging from 4 to 7) among these seven
foreground branches (Supplementary figure S5). Within each of these datasets, we
calculated foreground acceleration scores for control and positive trees using each
method independently. Contrasting the power of the methods to precisely detect
positive trees as showing convergent rate acceleration, we observed that the
updated method to calculate relative rates is consistently more powerful than the
original method. We repeated the analysis choosing seven foreground branches that
were long on average rather than short (Supplementary figure S5). Similar to the
short foreground scenario, we observed that the updated method is able to more
precisely detect convergent rate acceleration with the inclusion of additional
foreground branches in the simulated trees (Figure 7B).
Figure 7. Improved power to detect foreground rate shifts using the updated method
across different numbers of foreground branches. This analysis was performed across
five independent simulations of control trees and positive trees with varying numbers of
foreground branches (4 to 7). Within each simulation, we measured the area under the
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Oct. 30, 2018; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/457309. The copyright holder for this preprint
precision-recall curve (AUPR) to precisely detect positive trees using the foreground
acceleration score. The AUPR distributions obtained using the updated method to calculate
relative rates are consistently elevated compared to the original method across simulations
with different numbers of foreground branches. These simulations were performed across
two scenarios with different foreground branch sets consisting short (A) and long branches
(B) respectively.
Relative rates-based inference is robust to minor uncertainties in species tree
topology
Our method relies on estimating sequence divergence on branches of
phylogenetic trees with a fixed topology. Efforts to better resolve the phylogeny of
extant mammals have resulted in continuous updates to the consensus species tree
topology (Murphy et al., 2001, 2007). Topology trees commonly used in
phylogenomic analyses of extant mammals include the UCSC genome browser’s
100-way tree, as well as the timetrees reported in the Meredith et al and BinindaEmonds
et al (Bininda-Emonds et al., 2007; Meredith et al., 2011; Casper et al.,
2018). Differences between these species tree topologies often involve entire clades,
and the decision to choose a particular topology tree can potentially strongly
influence the outcomes of phylogenetic analyses. Here, we benchmarked the
robustness of our relative rates methods to the choice of topology tree. We
constructed protein-coding gene trees based on two different species tree
topologies, namely the UCSC 100-way tree and our modified Meredith et al.
(Meredith+) topology tree (see Methods). The Robinson-Foulds metric between
these two phylogenies is 22, reflecting differences in 22 partitions of species
(Robinson and Foulds, 1981; Schliep, 2011). We observed that both the updated
and original methods to calculate relative rates show robust signatures of
subterranean rate acceleration for eye-specific genes with respect to the species
tree topology used (Figure 8).
Figure 8. Comparison of robustness of methods to species tree topology. Both
the original and updated relative rates based methods are robust to choice of
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Oct. 30, 2018; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/457309. The copyright holder for this preprint
species tree topology used to construct individual gene trees. Points represent the
strength of convergent subterranean acceleration for eye-specific genes whose trees
were constructed using the Meredith+ topology (x-axis), and the UCSC topology (yaxis)
respectively. The robustness of each method is estimated as the spearman
correlation coefficient of the subterranean acceleration scores across the two tree
datasets.
Discussion
Our previous evolutionary-rates-based method to detect genomic elements
underlying convergent phenotypes has already proved to be a valuable technique to
detect genes and enhancers associated with transitions to marine and subterranean
habitats (Chikina, Robinson and Clark, 2016; Partha et al., 2017). However, the
original method suffered from reduced power to detect such genomic elements due
to a heteroscedastic relationship between the mean and variance of branch lengths
for a given branch across all gene trees, i.e. branches that are longer on average
have higher variance than branches that are shorter on average. Here, we
developed a method using a square-root transformation and a weighted regression
based on the observed mean-variance relationship to correct for the
heteroscedasticity. We tested our improved method on real and simulated
phylogenies and observed improved robustness to wider ranges of branch lengths
and increased ability to detect convergent evolutionary rate shifts. Our method,
called RERconverge, is freely-available on GitHub (Kowalczyk et al., 2018)
(https://github.com/nclark-lab/RERconverge).
Our new method offers increased robustness to the inclusion of distantlyrelated
species with long branch lengths in our phylogeny, namely non-placental
mammals. When we compared results from an analysis using only placental
mammals and an analysis that included non-placental mammals using both our
previous and our updated methods, we found that our new method, unlike the
previous method, is unimpaired by the inclusion of non-placental mammals. By
improving our method’s robustness to inclusion of long branches, we increased the
method’s applicability to a broader range of species and hence a broader range of
convergent phenotypes. Additionally, our new method’s increased power could
enable us to discover more convergently evolving genomic elements. One particular
incentivizing example for these improvements is the recent efforts to sequence the
northern marsupial mole, a completely blind mammal (Archer et al., 2011). When
considering using subterranean species to find genes and enhancers associated
with vision, the ability to include the non-placental marsupial mole along with the
other non-placental mammals in our dataset will allow for more power in a scan for
vision-specific genetic elements showing convergent regression in the five blind
mammals.
Beyond examining individual genes, we further assessed our new method’s
ability to detect pathway enrichments for genes under relaxation of constraint in
subterranean mammals and marine mammals (see Figure 9 for marine foreground
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Oct. 30, 2018; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/457309. The copyright holder for this preprint
branches). Compared to our previous method, the updated method detected more
enriched Gene Ontology (GO) terms with accelerated evolutionary rates in
subterranean mammals (Table 2). Additionally, the fold enrichment for detected
terms was significantly stronger with the updated method (Figure S6, Supplementary
Table S1). On the other hand, the marine system showed mixed results. Both the
new and the old method showed approximately equal power to detect enriched GO
terms if we only consider the number of terms detected (Table 3). However, when
comparing the fold enrichment for detected terms, the old method was significantly
better than the updated method (Figure S6, Supplementary Table S1). These
contrasting results from the subterranean dataset versus the marine dataset indicate
the importance of tailoring the corrections we have developed to the dataset of
interest, as well as the importance of taking advantage of simulation-based power
and robustness assessments to develop methods that are broadly applicable to
many convergent phenotypes.
In addition to testing our method on real data, we also developed a
simulation-based strategy to represent a “true positive” case of convergent evolution.
Our simulations follow a similar approach to simulating RNA-seq counts where
simulated rates are essentially capturing the number of substitutions that occur along
a branch (Di et al., 2011). We showed that our new method demonstrates improved
detection of rate shifts both when foreground species occupy long, high-variance
branches and when foreground species occupy short, low-variance branches. This
allows the method to detect convergent rate shifts given a variety of potential
configurations of convergently-evolving species. The types of simulations we
developed are essential because relatively few concrete instances of sequence-level
evolutionary convergence exist, so biologically accurate simulations of such
evolution are essential to rigorously test methods that detect shifts in evolutionary
rates. One simplification of our simulation method is that all species are present in all
simulated trees, which is not the case in real genomic data because of genomic
element gain and loss across species. However, maintaining constant species
composition in our simulated trees should have little impact on our ability to compare
our methods because we expect both to be equally impacted by species presence
and absence. A second simplification is that we assume all convergently-evolving
species have the same phylogenetic relatedness, i.e. each foreground branch is an
independent instance of convergent evolutionary rates. We would like to be able to
answer questions about our method’s power given more complex phylogenetic
configurations. Developing methods to answer those types of questions will require a
much higher degree of complexity in our simulations, but it will also allow us to
determine which species to add to our genomic datasets to increase our power to
find convergently evolving genomic features.
Our improved method has proved valuable for detecting genomic elements
associated with two binary traits - subterranean-dwelling or not, and marine-dwelling
or not - and we will extend our method for use in convergent continuous traits and
non-binary discrete traits. We will also assemble complementary analyses to assess
the robustness and power of each method. By extending the scope of our method to
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Oct. 30, 2018; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/457309. The copyright holder for this preprint
non-binary traits, we will expand the potential search-space of our method to a
plethora of new convergent phenotypes. Our overarching goal is to develop an entire
suite of methods that can utilize any conceivable phenotypes as inputs to accurately
and robustly identify convergently evolving genomic elements.
topN: number of
top accelerated
genes
# subterranean-accelerated GO terms (FDR < 0.05)
Original method Updated method
20 2 9
100 11 28
200 16 32
Table 2. Comparison of number of vision-related Gene Ontology terms enriched in top
subterranean-accelerated genes discovered by the original and updated methods.
Gene Ontology term enrichment analysis was performed individually on top subterranean
accelerated genes discovered by each method. Across varying numbers of top target genes,
genes discovered using the updated method were consistently enriched for higher numbers
of vision-related GO terms.
topN: number of top
accelerated genes
# marine-accelerated GO terms (FDR < 0.05)
Original method Updated method
50 16 10
100 27 31
200 59 59
Table 3. Comparison of number of Gene Ontology terms enriched in top marineaccelerated
genes discovered by the original and updated methods. Gene Ontology
term enrichment analysis was performed individually on top marine-accelerated genes
discovered by each method. Across varying numbers of top target genes, neither method
showed a clear superiority over the other at detecting higher numbers of enriched terms.
Materials and Methods
Protein-coding gene trees across 63 mammalian species
We downloaded the 100-species multiz amino acid alignments available at the
UCSC genome browser, and retained only alignments with a minimum of 10 species.
We then pruned each alignment down to the species represented in Figure 9 of the
proteome-wide average tree. We added the blind mole rat ortholog of each gene
based on the methods described in Partha et al (Partha et al., 2017). We estimated
the branch lengths for each amino acid alignment using the aaml program from the
package PAML (Yang, 2007). We estimated these branch lengths on a tree topology
modified from the timetree published in Meredith et al. We attempted to resolve
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Oct. 30, 2018; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/457309. The copyright holder for this preprint
conflicts between the topology inferred in Meredith et al. compared to that in BinindaEmonds
et al. based on a consensus of various studies employing a finer scale
phylogenetic inference of the species involved (Bininda-Emonds et al., 2007;
Meredith et al., 2011). The differences between our final topology, which we call
‘Meredith+’ topology and the Meredith et al. topology include setting the star-nosed
mole as an outgroup to the hedgehog and shrew; cow as an outgroup to the Tibetan
antelope, sheep and goat; and the ursid clade as an outgroup to mustelid and
pinniped clades. For more details about the literature surveyed to resolve these
differences, please refer to Meyer et al (Meyer et al., 2018). The topology of our final
‘Meredith+’ tree compared to the UCSC topology tree is reported in Figure 9. In order
to perform analyses benchmarking the method robustness to tree topology, we
additionally generated the protein-coding gene trees based on the UCSC tree
topology.
Figure 9. Cladograms describing relationships between 63 mammalian species used
for constructing genome-wide maximum likelihood protein-coding gene trees. Tree
reported in UCSC genome browser (left) and the final version of the tree we modified from
the topology reported in Meredith et al (right). Branches corresponding to subterranean and
marine mammals are highlighted in red and blue, respectively.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Oct. 30, 2018; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/457309. The copyright holder for this preprint
Simulating phylogenetic trees
Phylogenetic branch lengths have units of number of substitutions per site and thus
can be thought of as normalized count data. However, we find that a Poisson
distribution is unsuitable in this case as the real branch length data shows
considerable overdispersion, that is the variance is higher than the mean. We thus
model the branch lengths of the simulated trees using a negative binomial
distribution, following ideas from studies simulating expression counts for RNAseq
analysis (Robinson, McCarthy and Smyth, 2009; Di et al., 2011; Law et al., 2014;
Ritchie et al., 2015).
We simulated datasets of phylogenetic trees using the UCSC tree topology
and branch lengths from the average proteome-wide tree across 19,149 mammalian
protein-coding gene trees across 62 mammals. Supplementary figure S2 describes
the tree topology used for the simulations. We simulate the branch lengths (or rates)
for every branch (j) on each tree (i) according to the following formula,
bij = Poisson (Gamma (αiλj
, αiλj − sqrt(αiλj))),
where Gamma is parametrized by mean and variance. Here, 𝛼𝑖
is a genespecific
scaling term, 𝜆𝑗
is the average rate of the corresponding branch so that 𝛼𝑖𝜆𝑗
is the expected rate on the i𝑗’th branch, and the simulated rate is drawn from a
Gamma distribution with that mean. The composite Poisson-Gamma distribution is
equivalent to the negative binomial distribution and thus in our simulation the mean
variance relationship has a quadratic component, matching what we observe in real
data.
We simulate two classes of trees in every dataset based on different input
parameters. We simulate ‘control’ trees, trees where the j are simply the average
rate on the branch j. These ‘control’ trees do not show any explicit convergent rate
shift on any of the branches. We additionally simulate 'positive' trees showing
convergent rate acceleration on foreground branches by sampling at 2*λj, only on
these branches. Thus, the foreground branches in positive trees are effectively
sampled at an accelerated rate compared to the foreground branches in control
trees.
Calculating gene-trait correlations
The gene-trait correlations are computed under a Mann-Whitney U testing
framework over the binary variable of foreground vs background branches. In the
subterranean example, the four subterranean branches (Figure 1) are designated as
foreground. We calculate a foreground acceleration score reflecting the strength of
convergent rate acceleration on the foreground branches. The value is calculated as
the negative logarithm of the p-value of the Mann-Whitney test multiplied by the
direction of the correlation as given by the sign of the rho statistic. A positive rho
statistic indicates rate acceleration in the foreground species, and the negative
logarithm of p-value reflects the strength of the convergent rate shift. In simulated
trees study, we generated trees for three sets of foreground branches with different
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
(which was not peer-reviewed) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
bioRxiv preprint first posted online Oct. 30, 2018; doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/457309. The copyright holder for this preprint
branch length distributions - short, intermediate, and long as illustrated in Figure 6
and Figure S5.
Foreground acceleration score = Sign(Rho) ∗ [−log10P],
where rho and P are the correlation coefficient and statistical significance of the
Mann-Whitney test for association between relative rates and binary trait.
Genes showing eye-specific expression
We identified eye-specific gene sets using microarray expression data from 91
mouse tissues (Su et al., 2004). We identified genes specifically expressed in the
following tissues of the eye - cornea, iris, lens and retina (including retinal pigmented
epithelium). These genes showed significant differential expression only in the tissue
of interest compared to the other tissues at an alpha of 0.05 (T-test)
Gene Ontology term enrichment analysis
We performed functional enrichment analysis in target gene lists using the GOrilla
tool (Eden et al., 2009). For each analysis, GO terms enriched in target gene lists
were identified by comparing to a background gene list with all 19,149 genes used to
construct gene trees.
Despite their varied and often essential functions, small
proteins have been consistently underannotated in both
prokaryotic and eukaryotic genomes.1 Small open reading
frame (smORF)-encoded small proteins function in bacteria as
regulators of sporulation, cell division, membrane transport,
membrane-bound enzymes, protein kinases, and chaperones.1−7
In a study of 51 recently discovered small Escherichia
coli proteins, 21 were upregulated under a specific stress or
growth condition.8 Notably, 90% of the small proteins that
exhibited regulated expression were predicted to contain single
transmembrane helices.8 It is therefore reasonable to
hypothesize that additional small, membrane-associated bacterial
stress response proteins remain to be discovered. Of the
three leading technologies for smORF discovery, computational
genomics,9 ribosome footprinting,10,11 and liquid chromatography−tandem
mass spectrometry proteomics (LC−MS/
MS),12−15 LC−MS/MS has the advantage of direct detection
of peptides derived from nonannotated proteins and has
recently been extended to quantitative analysis.16−19 However,
bottom-up LC−MS/MS proteomics affords relatively poor
detection of membrane proteins due to their low abundance
and hydrophobicity,20,21 suggesting that membrane-associated,
nonannotated small proteins may have been missed by previous
quantitative LC−MS/MS studies. To address this limitation, we
present a workflow for quantitative membrane proteomics. We
apply this methodology to the E. coli K12 heat shock response,
enabling the discovery of a previously nonannotated,
membrane-associated small heat shock protein, which we
provisionally name GndA.
We and others recently reported a label-free quantitation
protocol for comparative profiling of nonannotated peptides
between two conditions.16,19 Figure 1A provides an overview of
a membrane-focused quantitative proteomic workflow. Briefly,
E. coli K12 substr. MG1655 is grown under standard (control)
conditions or subjected to heat shock, then lysed. Cell
membranes are pelleted via ultracentrifugation, and the
membrane proteome is resolubilized and separated on a
peptide gel.15 Protein bands of low molecular weight are
excised and subjected to trypsin digest. The digest is then
fractionated by electrostatic repulsion hydrophilic interaction
chromatography (ERLIC), and the fractions are analyzed by
LC−MS/MS. Subsequently, the data are searched against a 6-
frame translation of the E. coli K12 MG1655 genome using
MASCOT, permitting identification of both known and
nonannotated peptides. Annotated peptides are excluded with
a string-matching algorithm14 via comparison to the E. coli K12
MG1655 proteome. For semiquantitative, comparative analysis
of peptide abundance, sequences detected only in the heat
shock sample and not the control are identified, then MS1
extracted ion chromatograph (EIC) peak intensities at the same
retention time are compared.
Prior to analysis of nonannotated sequences, we first
validated our workflow’s ability to quantify differential
expression of peptides from an annotated heat shock protein.
Comparing the EICs for selected tryptic fragments of the heat
shock protein DnaJ (Hsp40) and a known nonheat shock
protein, 50S ribosomal subunit protein L6 (RplF), verified that
the DnaJ peptide was detected only during heat shock, while
the RplF peptide was detected equally under both normal
growth and heat shock (Supporting Information (SI), Figure
S1), as expected. Therefore, we reliably distinguished heat
shock responsive vs constitutive expression using label-free
quantitation.
Second, we analyzed our workflow’s size selectivity. To do so,
we first plotted the sizes of all annotated proteins identified in
both our heat shock and control samples that were subjected to
membrane enrichment. This analysis revealed a clear enrichment
of small proteins, with the most commonly detected
protein sizes ranging from 10 to 20 kDa (SI, Figure S2A),
similar to size distributions obtained for soluble proteins in past
LC−MS/MS proteomics studies of smORFs.14−16
Finally, we confirmed that we obtained an enrichment in
peptides derived from membrane proteins by comparing our
membrane-enriched control sample (not subjected to heat
shock) to a previously reported sample grown under similar
conditions that was not subjected to membrane preparation.19
We compared all of the annotated proteins identified using our
membrane-enriched sample and the sample without membrane
enrichment against a list of all E. coli K12 substr. MG1655
membrane proteins obtained from EcoCyc. These searches
showed that 412/1208, or 34%, of annotated proteins detected
from the membrane enrichment workflow had a membrane
localization annotation, as opposed to 488/1849, or 26%, of
annotated proteins detected from the regular workflow without
enriching for membrane proteins (SI, Figure S2B). Of these
proteins with membrane annotation, we detected peptides from
135 of them only in the workflow with membrane enrichment.
These results suggest that our workflow provides an enhancement
in the detection of peptides derived from membrane
proteins while retaining small size selectivity.
The results of our proteomic analysis of heat shock and
control samples are presented in SI, Proteomic results, and
protein-level identifications are ranked according to sequence
coverage. Because we focused on molecular genetic validation
rather than statistical analysis of replicates to identify GndA as a
heat shock protein (vide infra), we note that only a single
experimental replicate is presented, so any other candidate heat
shock-specific peptides must be considered putative. Nevertheless,
our data set may aid hypothesis generation about
regulated expression of predicted proteins. For example,
peptides mapping to four known or predicted small proteins
without currently annotated heat shock functions were detected
in the heat shock sample but not in the control sample (SI,
Figure S3 and S4). Two of these proteins are known or
predicted to localize to the membrane (YfgG and YghG), and
three currently lack functional characterization. Further experiments
will be required to test heat shock responsive expression
of these proteins.
In our heat shock data set, we identified precisely one
nonannotated tryptic peptide exhibiting excellent sequence
coverage (Figure 1B). Comparative analysis of the extracted ion
chromatogram for this nonannotated tryptic peptide revealed
MS1 ion intensity in our heat shock sample and not in the
control (Figure 1C). This nonannotated peptide maps uniquely
to an open reading frame (ORF) that is contained entirely
within the gene gnd in the +2 reading frame (Figure 2). The
putative protein that would be produced by translation of this
ORF would therefore be completely different from Gnd at the
amino acid level. Because of its coencoding with gnd, we refer
to the smORF as gndA. There are two in-frame ATG codons
upstream of the sequence putatively encoding the peptide
detected by LC−MS/MS, either of which could plausibly
initiate translation of GndA (Figure 2B). The length of GndA
would thus most likely be 36−54 amino acids. Because bottomup
proteomics does not provide full sequence coverage for this
putative protein, we have not yet confirmed the start codon or
complete primary sequence for GndA, and it remains possible
that neither in-frame ATG codon is the correct start site for this
protein.
Because we identified only a single tryptic peptide that
mapped to GndA, rigorous molecular genetic confirmation of
its expression was required. We verified that gndA was
expressed and upregulated during heat shock by generating a
chromosomally tagged strain with the coding sequence for the
tandem epitope tag SPA8 integrated at the 3′ end of the
predicted gndA smORF. We confirmed the site of SPA tag
insertion via integration check PCR and sequencing (SI, Figure
S5). We grew the SPA-tagged strain under control and heat
shock conditions and specifically detected expression of an
immunoreactive band during heat shock (Figure 3). (Many
membrane proteins exhibit anomalous mobility in SDSPAGE,22
so the apparent migration of GndA-SPA may not
exactly correlate with its molecular weight.) This result is
consistent with expression of a small protein in the gndA
reading frame during heat shock.
In the absence of a complete assignment of the gndA coding
sequence, it remained possible that the observed peptide was
generated via an alternative mechanism, such as ribosomal
frameshifting during translation of 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase
(Gnd), the protein product of gnd. We therefore
confirmed that GndA can be translated independently. We
generated pET21a plasmids containing the genomic sequence
comprising the annotated ATG start codon of gnd to the stop
codon of gndA. GFP was fused to the C-terminus of GndA to
enhance stability and enable immunoblotting. We also deleted
the start codon of gnd from this construct. We observed that
expression of both of these constructs in BL21 cells produces
the same product, which migrates at a slightly higher apparent
molecular weight than GFP alone (SI, Figure S6). This result is
consistent with independent translation of GndA, although it
does not exclude all alternative interpretations.
Bioinformatic and biochemical analyses suggest that the
predicted primary sequence of GndA may correspond to a
small transmembrane protein. A portion of the putative GndA
sequence (Figure 4A), highlighted in red, was predicted by
three programs (TMPred, Phobius,23,24 and PredictProtein25)
to form a transmembrane helix. Using the GFP fusion construct
employed in SI, Figure S6, we performed a membrane
fractionation. We verified by Western blotting that GndAGFP
is highly enriched in the membrane pellet after
ultracentrifugation as compared to total clarified lysate and
the soluble fraction, consistent with membrane localization
(Figure 4C). A BLAST search against the NCBI nonredundant
protein database did not reveal significant homology between
GndA and known proteins (data not shown), and the predicted
primary sequence of GndA lacks a signal sequence. Therefore,
determination of the full sequence, function, mechanism of
membrane insertion, inner vs outer membrane localization, and
orientation of GndA in the membrane will require further
study.
In summary, we have developed an LC−MS/MS method to
detect a peptide derived from a nonannotated small membrane
protein regulated by heat shock, GndA. Notably, gndA would
have been difficult to identify through alternative approaches to
smORF discovery, including bioinformatics and ribosome
footprinting, because the frameshifted gndA coding sequence
is completely contained within the larger gnd sequence. Thus,
our method presents a complementary approach to new gene
discovery. In the future, we anticipate that this method can be
extended to profiling of nonannotated membrane proteins
expressed under different stress conditions and in other
organisms.